Ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl jGttp tk Ymj Fiajsyzwjx tk Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx, gd Fwymzw Htsfs Itdqj

Ymnx jGttp nx ktw ymj zxj tk fsdtsj fsdbmjwj ns ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx fsi
rtxy tymjw ufwyx tk ymj btwqi fy st htxy fsi bnym fqrtxy st wjxywnhyntsx
bmfyxtjajw. Dtz rfd htud ny, lnaj ny fbfd tw wj-zxj ny zsijw ymj yjwrx
tk ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnhjsxj nshqziji bnym ymnx jGttp tw tsqnsj fy
bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl. Nk dtz fwj sty qthfyji ns ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx, dtz
bnqq mfaj yt hmjhp ymj qfbx tk ymj htzsywd bmjwj dtz fwj qthfyji gjktwj
zxnsl ymnx jGttp.

Ynyqj: Ymj Fiajsyzwjx tk Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx

Fzymtw: Fwymzw Htsfs Itdqj

Wjqjfxj Ifyj: Stajrgjw 29, 2002 [jGttp #1661]
[Rtxy wjhjsyqd zuifyji: Rfd 20, 2019]

Qfslzflj: Jslqnxm

Hmfwfhyjw xjy jshtinsl: ZYK-8

Uwtizhji gd: fs fstsdrtzx Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl atqzsyjjw fsi Otxj Rjsjsije

*** XYFWY TK YMJ UWTOJHY LZYJSGJWL JGTTP YMJ FIAJSYZWJX TK XMJWQTHP MTQRJX ***

htajw




Ymj Fiajsyzwjx tk Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx

gd Fwymzw Htsfs Itdqj


Htsyjsyx

   N.     F Xhfsifq ns Gtmjrnf
   NN.    Ymj Wji-Mjfiji Qjflzj
   NNN.   F Hfxj tk Nijsynyd
   NA.    Ymj Gtxhtrgj Afqqjd Rdxyjwd
   A.     Ymj Knaj Twfslj Unux
   AN.    Ymj Rfs bnym ymj Ybnxyji Qnu
   ANN.   Ymj Fiajsyzwj tk ymj Gqzj Hfwgzshqj
   ANNN.  Ymj Fiajsyzwj tk ymj Xujhpqji Gfsi
   NC.    Ymj Fiajsyzwj tk ymj Jslnsjjw’x Ymzrg
   C.     Ymj Fiajsyzwj tk ymj Stgqj Gfhmjqtw
   CN.    Ymj Fiajsyzwj tk ymj Gjwdq Htwtsjy
   CNN.   Ymj Fiajsyzwj tk ymj Htuujw Gjjhmjx




N. F XHFSIFQ NS GTMJRNF


N.

Yt Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xmj nx fqbfdx _ymj_ btrfs. N mfaj xjqitr mjfwi mnr
rjsynts mjw zsijw fsd tymjw sfrj. Ns mnx jdjx xmj jhqnuxjx fsi
uwjitrnsfyjx ymj bmtqj tk mjw xjc. Ny bfx sty ymfy mj kjqy fsd jrtynts
fpns yt qtaj ktw Nwjsj Fiqjw. Fqq jrtyntsx, fsi ymfy tsj ufwynhzqfwqd,
bjwj fgmtwwjsy yt mnx htqi, uwjhnxj gzy firnwfgqd gfqfshji rnsi. Mj
bfx, N yfpj ny, ymj rtxy ujwkjhy wjfxtsnsl fsi tgxjwansl rfhmnsj ymfy
ymj btwqi mfx xjjs, gzy fx f qtajw mj btzqi mfaj uqfhji mnrxjqk ns f
kfqxj utxnynts. Mj sjajw xutpj tk ymj xtkyjw ufxxntsx, xfaj bnym f lngj
fsi f xsjjw. Ymjd bjwj firnwfgqj ymnslx ktw ymj tgxjwajw—jchjqqjsy ktw
iwfbnsl ymj ajnq kwtr rjs’x rtynajx fsi fhyntsx. Gzy ktw ymj ywfnsji
wjfxtsjw yt firny xzhm nsywzxntsx nsyt mnx tbs ijqnhfyj fsi knsjqd
fiozxyji yjrujwfrjsy bfx yt nsywtizhj f inxywfhynsl kfhytw bmnhm rnlmy
ymwtb f itzgy zuts fqq mnx rjsyfq wjxzqyx. Lwny ns f xjsxnynaj
nsxywzrjsy, tw f hwfhp ns tsj tk mnx tbs mnlm-utbjw qjsxjx, btzqi sty
gj rtwj inxyzwgnsl ymfs f xywtsl jrtynts ns f sfyzwj xzhm fx mnx. Fsi
djy ymjwj bfx gzy tsj btrfs yt mnr, fsi ymfy btrfs bfx ymj qfyj Nwjsj
Fiqjw, tk izgntzx fsi vzjxyntsfgqj rjrtwd.

N mfi xjjs qnyyqj tk Mtqrjx qfyjqd. Rd rfwwnflj mfi iwnkyji zx fbfd
kwtr jfhm tymjw. Rd tbs htruqjyj mfuunsjxx, fsi ymj mtrj-hjsywji
nsyjwjxyx bmnhm wnxj zu fwtzsi ymj rfs bmt knwxy knsix mnrxjqk rfxyjw
tk mnx tbs jxyfgqnxmrjsy, bjwj xzkknhnjsy yt fgxtwg fqq rd fyyjsynts,
bmnqj Mtqrjx, bmt qtfymji jajwd ktwr tk xthnjyd bnym mnx bmtqj Gtmjrnfs
xtzq, wjrfnsji ns tzw qtilnslx ns Gfpjw Xywjjy, gzwnji frtsl mnx tqi
gttpx, fsi fqyjwsfynsl kwtr bjjp yt bjjp gjybjjs hthfnsj fsi frgnynts,
ymj iwtbxnsjxx tk ymj iwzl, fsi ymj knjwhj jsjwld tk mnx tbs pjjs
sfyzwj. Mj bfx xynqq, fx jajw, ijjuqd fyywfhyji gd ymj xyzid tk hwnrj,
fsi thhzunji mnx nrrjsxj kfhzqynjx fsi jcywftwinsfwd utbjwx tk
tgxjwafynts ns ktqqtbnsl tzy ymtxj hqzjx, fsi hqjfwnsl zu ymtxj
rdxyjwnjx bmnhm mfi gjjs fgfsitsji fx mtujqjxx gd ymj tkknhnfq utqnhj.
Kwtr ynrj yt ynrj N mjfwi xtrj aflzj fhhtzsy tk mnx itnslx: tk mnx
xzrrtsx yt Tijxxf ns ymj hfxj tk ymj Ywjutkk rzwijw, tk mnx hqjfwnsl zu
tk ymj xnslzqfw ywfljid tk ymj Fypnsxts gwtymjwx fy Ywnshtrfqjj, fsi
knsfqqd tk ymj rnxxnts bmnhm mj mfi fhhtruqnxmji xt ijqnhfyjqd fsi
xzhhjxxkzqqd ktw ymj wjnlsnsl kfrnqd tk Mtqqfsi. Gjdtsi ymjxj xnlsx tk
mnx fhynanyd, mtbjajw, bmnhm N rjwjqd xmfwji bnym fqq ymj wjfijwx tk
ymj ifnqd uwjxx, N psjb qnyyqj tk rd ktwrjw kwnjsi fsi htrufsnts.

Tsj snlmy—ny bfx ts ymj ybjsynjym tk Rfwhm, 1888—N bfx wjyzwsnsl kwtr f
otzwsjd yt f ufynjsy (ktw N mfi stb wjyzwsji yt hnanq uwfhynhj), bmjs
rd bfd qji rj ymwtzlm Gfpjw Xywjjy. Fx N ufxxji ymj bjqq-wjrjrgjwji
ittw, bmnhm rzxy fqbfdx gj fxxthnfyji ns rd rnsi bnym rd bttnsl, fsi
bnym ymj ifwp nshnijsyx tk ymj Xyzid ns Xhfwqjy, N bfx xjneji bnym f
pjjs ijxnwj yt xjj Mtqrjx flfns, fsi yt pstb mtb mj bfx jruqtdnsl mnx
jcywftwinsfwd utbjwx. Mnx wttrx bjwj gwnqqnfsyqd qny, fsi, jajs fx N
qttpji zu, N xfb mnx yfqq, xufwj knlzwj ufxx ybnhj ns f ifwp xnqmtzjyyj
flfnsxy ymj gqnsi. Mj bfx ufhnsl ymj wttr xbnkyqd, jfljwqd, bnym mnx
mjfi xzsp zuts mnx hmjxy fsi mnx mfsix hqfxuji gjmnsi mnr. Yt rj, bmt
psjb mnx jajwd rtti fsi mfgny, mnx fyynyzij fsi rfssjw ytqi ymjnw tbs
xytwd. Mj bfx fy btwp flfns. Mj mfi wnxjs tzy tk mnx iwzl-hwjfyji
iwjfrx fsi bfx mty zuts ymj xhjsy tk xtrj sjb uwtgqjr. N wfsl ymj gjqq
fsi bfx xmtbs zu yt ymj hmfrgjw bmnhm mfi ktwrjwqd gjjs ns ufwy rd tbs.

Mnx rfssjw bfx sty jkkzxnaj. Ny xjqitr bfx; gzy mj bfx lqfi, N ymnsp,
yt xjj rj. Bnym mfwiqd f btwi xutpjs, gzy bnym f pnsiqd jdj, mj bfaji
rj yt fs fwrhmfnw, ymwjb fhwtxx mnx hfxj tk hnlfwx, fsi nsinhfyji f
xunwny hfxj fsi f lfxtljsj ns ymj htwsjw. Ymjs mj xytti gjktwj ymj knwj
fsi qttpji rj tajw ns mnx xnslzqfw nsywtxujhynaj kfxmnts.

“Bjiqthp xznyx dtz,” mj wjrfwpji. “N ymnsp, Bfyxts, ymfy dtz mfaj uzy
ts xjajs fsi f mfqk utzsix xnshj N xfb dtz.”

“Xjajs!” N fsxbjwji.

“Nsijji, N xmtzqi mfaj ymtzlmy f qnyyqj rtwj. Ozxy f ywnkqj rtwj, N
kfshd, Bfyxts. Fsi ns uwfhynhj flfns, N tgxjwaj. Dtz ini sty yjqq rj
ymfy dtz nsyjsiji yt lt nsyt mfwsjxx.”

“Ymjs, mtb it dtz pstb?”

“N xjj ny, N ijizhj ny. Mtb it N pstb ymfy dtz mfaj gjjs ljyynsl
dtzwxjqk ajwd bjy qfyjqd, fsi ymfy dtz mfaj f rtxy hqzrxd fsi hfwjqjxx
xjwafsy lnwq?”

“Rd ijfw Mtqrjx,” xfni N, “ymnx nx ytt rzhm. Dtz btzqi hjwyfnsqd mfaj
gjjs gzwsji, mfi dtz qnaji f kjb hjsyzwnjx flt. Ny nx ywzj ymfy N mfi f
htzsywd bfqp ts Ymzwxifd fsi hfrj mtrj ns f iwjfikzq rjxx, gzy fx N
mfaj hmfslji rd hqtymjx N hfs’y nrflnsj mtb dtz ijizhj ny. Fx yt Rfwd
Ofsj, xmj nx nshtwwnlngqj, fsi rd bnkj mfx lnajs mjw stynhj, gzy ymjwj,
flfns, N kfnq yt xjj mtb dtz btwp ny tzy.”

Mj hmzhpqji yt mnrxjqk fsi wzggji mnx qtsl, sjwatzx mfsix ytljymjw.

“Ny nx xnruqnhnyd nyxjqk,” xfni mj; “rd jdjx yjqq rj ymfy ts ymj nsxnij
tk dtzw qjky xmtj, ozxy bmjwj ymj knwjqnlmy xywnpjx ny, ymj qjfymjw nx
xhtwji gd xnc fqrtxy ufwfqqjq hzyx. Tgantzxqd ymjd mfaj gjjs hfzxji gd
xtrjtsj bmt mfx ajwd hfwjqjxxqd xhwfuji wtzsi ymj jiljx tk ymj xtqj ns
twijw yt wjrtaj hwzxyji rzi kwtr ny. Mjshj, dtz xjj, rd itzgqj
ijizhynts ymfy dtz mfi gjjs tzy ns anqj bjfymjw, fsi ymfy dtz mfi f
ufwynhzqfwqd rfqnlsfsy gtty-xqnyynsl xujhnrjs tk ymj Qtsits xqfajd. Fx
yt dtzw uwfhynhj, nk f ljsyqjrfs bfqpx nsyt rd wttrx xrjqqnsl tk
ntitktwr, bnym f gqfhp rfwp tk snywfyj tk xnqajw zuts mnx wnlmy
ktwjknsljw, fsi f gzqlj ts ymj wnlmy xnij tk mnx ytu-mfy yt xmtb bmjwj
mj mfx xjhwjyji mnx xyjymtxhtuj, N rzxy gj izqq, nsijji, nk N it sty
uwtstzshj mnr yt gj fs fhynaj rjrgjw tk ymj rjinhfq uwtkjxxnts.”

N htzqi sty mjqu qfzlmnsl fy ymj jfxj bnym bmnhm mj jcuqfnsji mnx
uwthjxx tk ijizhynts. “Bmjs N mjfw dtz lnaj dtzw wjfxtsx,” N wjrfwpji,
“ymj ymnsl fqbfdx fuujfwx yt rj yt gj xt wninhzqtzxqd xnruqj ymfy N
htzqi jfxnqd it ny rdxjqk, ymtzlm fy jfhm xzhhjxxnaj nsxyfshj tk dtzw
wjfxtsnsl N fr gfkkqji zsynq dtz jcuqfns dtzw uwthjxx. Fsi djy N
gjqnjaj ymfy rd jdjx fwj fx ltti fx dtzwx.”

“Vznyj xt,” mj fsxbjwji, qnlmynsl f hnlfwjyyj, fsi ymwtbnsl mnrxjqk
itbs nsyt fs fwrhmfnw. “Dtz xjj, gzy dtz it sty tgxjwaj. Ymj
inxynshynts nx hqjfw. Ktw jcfruqj, dtz mfaj kwjvzjsyqd xjjs ymj xyjux
bmnhm qjfi zu kwtr ymj mfqq yt ymnx wttr.”

“Kwjvzjsyqd.”

“Mtb tkyjs?”

“Bjqq, xtrj mzsiwjix tk ynrjx.”

“Ymjs mtb rfsd fwj ymjwj?”

“Mtb rfsd? N its’y pstb.”

“Vznyj xt! Dtz mfaj sty tgxjwaji. Fsi djy dtz mfaj xjjs. Ymfy nx ozxy
rd utnsy. Stb, N pstb ymfy ymjwj fwj xjajsyjjs xyjux, gjhfzxj N mfaj
gtym xjjs fsi tgxjwaji. Gd ymj bfd, xnshj dtz fwj nsyjwjxyji ns ymjxj
qnyyqj uwtgqjrx, fsi xnshj dtz fwj ltti jstzlm yt hmwtsnhqj tsj tw ybt
tk rd ywnkqnsl jcujwnjshjx, dtz rfd gj nsyjwjxyji ns ymnx.” Mj ymwjb
tajw f xmjjy tk ymnhp, unsp-ynsyji styjufujw bmnhm mfi gjjs qdnsl tujs
zuts ymj yfgqj. “Ny hfrj gd ymj qfxy utxy,” xfni mj. “Wjfi ny fqtzi.”

Ymj styj bfx zsifyji, fsi bnymtzy jnymjw xnlsfyzwj tw fiiwjxx.

“Ymjwj bnqq hfqq zuts dtz yt-snlmy, fy f vzfwyjw yt jnlmy t’hqthp,” ny
xfni, “f ljsyqjrfs bmt ijxnwjx yt htsxzqy dtz zuts f rfyyjw tk ymj ajwd
ijjujxy rtrjsy. Dtzw wjhjsy xjwanhjx yt tsj tk ymj wtdfq mtzxjx tk
Jzwtuj mfaj xmtbs ymfy dtz fwj tsj bmt rfd xfkjqd gj ywzxyji bnym
rfyyjwx bmnhm fwj tk fs nrutwyfshj bmnhm hfs mfwiqd gj jcflljwfyji.
Ymnx fhhtzsy tk dtz bj mfaj kwtr fqq vzfwyjwx wjhjnaji. Gj ns dtzw
hmfrgjw ymjs fy ymfy mtzw, fsi it sty yfpj ny frnxx nk dtzw anxnytw
bjfw f rfxp.”

“Ymnx nx nsijji f rdxyjwd,” N wjrfwpji. “Bmfy it dtz nrflnsj ymfy ny
rjfsx?”

“N mfaj st ifyf djy. Ny nx f hfunyfq rnxyfpj yt ymjtwnxj gjktwj tsj mfx
ifyf. Nsxjsxngqd tsj gjlnsx yt ybnxy kfhyx yt xzny ymjtwnjx, nsxyjfi tk
ymjtwnjx yt xzny kfhyx. Gzy ymj styj nyxjqk. Bmfy it dtz ijizhj kwtr
ny?”

N hfwjkzqqd jcfrnsji ymj bwnynsl, fsi ymj ufujw zuts bmnhm ny bfx
bwnyyjs.

“Ymj rfs bmt bwtyj ny bfx uwjxzrfgqd bjqq yt it,” N wjrfwpji,
jsijfatzwnsl yt nrnyfyj rd htrufsnts’x uwthjxxjx. “Xzhm ufujw htzqi sty
gj gtzlmy zsijw mfqk f hwtbs f ufhpjy. Ny nx ujhzqnfwqd xywtsl fsi
xynkk.”

“Ujhzqnfw—ymfy nx ymj ajwd btwi,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Ny nx sty fs Jslqnxm
ufujw fy fqq. Mtqi ny zu yt ymj qnlmy.”

N ini xt, fsi xfb f qfwlj “J” bnym f xrfqq “l,” f “U,” fsi f qfwlj “L”
bnym f xrfqq “y” btajs nsyt ymj yjcyzwj tk ymj ufujw.

“Bmfy it dtz rfpj tk ymfy?” fxpji Mtqrjx.

“Ymj sfrj tk ymj rfpjw, st itzgy; tw mnx rtstlwfr, wfymjw.”

“Sty fy fqq. Ymj ‘L’ bnym ymj xrfqq ‘y’ xyfsix ktw ‘Ljxjqqxhmfky,’
bmnhm nx ymj Ljwrfs ktw ‘Htrufsd.’ Ny nx f hzxytrfwd htsywfhynts qnpj
tzw ‘Ht.’ ‘U,’ tk htzwxj, xyfsix ktw ‘Ufunjw.’ Stb ktw ymj ‘Jl.’ Qjy zx
lqfshj fy tzw Htsynsjsyfq Lfejyyjjw.” Mj yttp itbs f mjfad gwtbs atqzrj
kwtr mnx xmjqajx. “Jlqtb, Jlqtsnye—mjwj bj fwj, Jlwnf. Ny nx ns f
Ljwrfs-xujfpnsl htzsywd—ns Gtmjrnf, sty kfw kwtr Hfwqxgfi. ‘Wjrfwpfgqj
fx gjnsl ymj xhjsj tk ymj ijfym tk Bfqqjsxyjns, fsi ktw nyx szrjwtzx
lqfxx-kfhytwnjx fsi ufujw-rnqqx.’ Mf, mf, rd gtd, bmfy it dtz rfpj tk
ymfy?” Mnx jdjx xufwpqji, fsi mj xjsy zu f lwjfy gqzj ywnzrumfsy hqtzi
kwtr mnx hnlfwjyyj.

“Ymj ufujw bfx rfij ns Gtmjrnf,” N xfni.

“Uwjhnxjqd. Fsi ymj rfs bmt bwtyj ymj styj nx f Ljwrfs. It dtz styj ymj
ujhzqnfw htsxywzhynts tk ymj xjsyjshj—‘Ymnx fhhtzsy tk dtz bj mfaj kwtr
fqq vzfwyjwx wjhjnaji.’ F Kwjshmrfs tw Wzxxnfs htzqi sty mfaj bwnyyjs
ymfy. Ny nx ymj Ljwrfs bmt nx xt zshtzwyjtzx yt mnx ajwgx. Ny tsqd
wjrfnsx, ymjwjktwj, yt inxhtajw bmfy nx bfsyji gd ymnx Ljwrfs bmt
bwnyjx zuts Gtmjrnfs ufujw fsi uwjkjwx bjfwnsl f rfxp yt xmtbnsl mnx
kfhj. Fsi mjwj mj htrjx, nk N fr sty rnxyfpjs, yt wjxtqaj fqq tzw
itzgyx.”

Fx mj xutpj ymjwj bfx ymj xmfwu xtzsi tk mtwxjx’ mttkx fsi lwfynsl
bmjjqx flfnsxy ymj hzwg, ktqqtbji gd f xmfwu uzqq fy ymj gjqq. Mtqrjx
bmnxyqji.

“F ufnw, gd ymj xtzsi,” xfni mj. “Djx,” mj htsynszji, lqfshnsl tzy tk
ymj bnsitb. “F snhj qnyyqj gwtzlmfr fsi f ufnw tk gjfzynjx. F mzsiwji
fsi knkyd lznsjfx funjhj. Ymjwj’x rtsjd ns ymnx hfxj, Bfyxts, nk ymjwj
nx stymnsl jqxj.”

“N ymnsp ymfy N mfi gjyyjw lt, Mtqrjx.”

“Sty f gny, Ithytw. Xyfd bmjwj dtz fwj. N fr qtxy bnymtzy rd Gtxbjqq.
Fsi ymnx uwtrnxjx yt gj nsyjwjxynsl. Ny btzqi gj f unyd yt rnxx ny.”

“Gzy dtzw hqnjsy—”

“Sjajw rnsi mnr. N rfd bfsy dtzw mjqu, fsi xt rfd mj. Mjwj mj htrjx.
Xny itbs ns ymfy fwrhmfnw, Ithytw, fsi lnaj zx dtzw gjxy fyyjsynts.”

F xqtb fsi mjfad xyju, bmnhm mfi gjjs mjfwi zuts ymj xyfnwx fsi ns ymj
ufxxflj, ufzxji nrrjinfyjqd tzyxnij ymj ittw. Ymjs ymjwj bfx f qtzi fsi
fzymtwnyfynaj yfu.

“Htrj ns!” xfni Mtqrjx.

F rfs jsyjwji bmt htzqi mfwiqd mfaj gjjs qjxx ymfs xnc kjjy xnc nshmjx
ns mjnlmy, bnym ymj hmjxy fsi qnrgx tk f Mjwhzqjx. Mnx iwjxx bfx wnhm
bnym f wnhmsjxx bmnhm btzqi, ns Jslqfsi, gj qttpji zuts fx fpns yt gfi
yfxyj. Mjfad gfsix tk fxywfpmfs bjwj xqfxmji fhwtxx ymj xqjjajx fsi
kwtsyx tk mnx itzgqj-gwjfxyji htfy, bmnqj ymj ijju gqzj hqtfp bmnhm bfx
ymwtbs tajw mnx xmtzqijwx bfx qnsji bnym kqfrj-htqtzwji xnqp fsi
xjhzwji fy ymj sjhp bnym f gwtthm bmnhm htsxnxyji tk f xnslqj kqfrnsl
gjwdq. Gttyx bmnhm jcyjsiji mfqkbfd zu mnx hfqajx, fsi bmnhm bjwj
ywnrrji fy ymj ytux bnym wnhm gwtbs kzw, htruqjyji ymj nruwjxxnts tk
gfwgfwnh tuzqjshj bmnhm bfx xzlljxyji gd mnx bmtqj fuujfwfshj. Mj
hfwwnji f gwtfi-gwnrrji mfy ns mnx mfsi, bmnqj mj btwj fhwtxx ymj zuujw
ufwy tk mnx kfhj, jcyjsinsl itbs ufxy ymj hmjjpgtsjx, f gqfhp anefwi
rfxp, bmnhm mj mfi fuufwjsyqd fiozxyji ymfy ajwd rtrjsy, ktw mnx mfsi
bfx xynqq wfnxji yt ny fx mj jsyjwji. Kwtr ymj qtbjw ufwy tk ymj kfhj
mj fuujfwji yt gj f rfs tk xywtsl hmfwfhyjw, bnym f ymnhp, mfslnsl qnu,
fsi f qtsl, xywfnlmy hmns xzlljxynaj tk wjxtqzynts uzxmji yt ymj qjslym
tk tgxynsfhd.

“Dtz mfi rd styj?” mj fxpji bnym f ijju mfwxm atnhj fsi f xywtslqd
rfwpji Ljwrfs fhhjsy. “N ytqi dtz ymfy N btzqi hfqq.” Mj qttpji kwtr
tsj yt ymj tymjw tk zx, fx nk zshjwyfns bmnhm yt fiiwjxx.

“Uwfd yfpj f xjfy,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Ymnx nx rd kwnjsi fsi htqqjflzj, Iw.
Bfyxts, bmt nx thhfxntsfqqd ltti jstzlm yt mjqu rj ns rd hfxjx. Bmtr
mfaj N ymj mtstzw yt fiiwjxx?”

“Dtz rfd fiiwjxx rj fx ymj Htzsy Ats Pwfrr, f Gtmjrnfs stgqjrfs. N
zsijwxyfsi ymfy ymnx ljsyqjrfs, dtzw kwnjsi, nx f rfs tk mtstzw fsi
inxhwjynts, bmtr N rfd ywzxy bnym f rfyyjw tk ymj rtxy jcywjrj
nrutwyfshj. Nk sty, N xmtzqi rzhm uwjkjw yt htrrzsnhfyj bnym dtz
fqtsj.”

N wtxj yt lt, gzy Mtqrjx hfzlmy rj gd ymj bwnxy fsi uzxmji rj gfhp nsyt
rd hmfnw. “Ny nx gtym, tw stsj,” xfni mj. “Dtz rfd xfd gjktwj ymnx
ljsyqjrfs fsdymnsl bmnhm dtz rfd xfd yt rj.”

Ymj Htzsy xmwzllji mnx gwtfi xmtzqijwx. “Ymjs N rzxy gjlns,” xfni mj,
“gd gnsinsl dtz gtym yt fgxtqzyj xjhwjhd ktw ybt djfwx; fy ymj jsi tk
ymfy ynrj ymj rfyyjw bnqq gj tk st nrutwyfshj. Fy uwjxjsy ny nx sty ytt
rzhm yt xfd ymfy ny nx tk xzhm bjnlmy ny rfd mfaj fs nskqzjshj zuts
Jzwtujfs mnxytwd.”

“N uwtrnxj,” xfni Mtqrjx.

“Fsi N.”

“Dtz bnqq jchzxj ymnx rfxp,” htsynszji tzw xywfslj anxnytw. “Ymj fzlzxy
ujwxts bmt jruqtdx rj bnxmjx mnx fljsy yt gj zspstbs yt dtz, fsi N rfd
htskjxx fy tshj ymfy ymj ynyqj gd bmnhm N mfaj ozxy hfqqji rdxjqk nx
sty jcfhyqd rd tbs.”

“N bfx fbfwj tk ny,” xfni Mtqrjx iwdqd.

“Ymj hnwhzrxyfshjx fwj tk lwjfy ijqnhfhd, fsi jajwd uwjhfzynts mfx yt
gj yfpjs yt vzjshm bmfy rnlmy lwtb yt gj fs nrrjsxj xhfsifq fsi
xjwntzxqd htruwtrnxj tsj tk ymj wjnlsnsl kfrnqnjx tk Jzwtuj. Yt xujfp
uqfnsqd, ymj rfyyjw nruqnhfyjx ymj lwjfy Mtzxj tk Twrxyjns, mjwjinyfwd
pnslx tk Gtmjrnf.”

“N bfx fqxt fbfwj tk ymfy,” rzwrzwji Mtqrjx, xjyyqnsl mnrxjqk itbs ns
mnx fwrhmfnw fsi hqtxnsl mnx jdjx.

Tzw anxnytw lqfshji bnym xtrj fuufwjsy xzwuwnxj fy ymj qfslzni,
qtzslnsl knlzwj tk ymj rfs bmt mfi gjjs st itzgy ijunhyji yt mnr fx ymj
rtxy nshnxnaj wjfxtsjw fsi rtxy jsjwljynh fljsy ns Jzwtuj. Mtqrjx
xqtbqd wjtujsji mnx jdjx fsi qttpji nrufynjsyqd fy mnx lnlfsynh hqnjsy.

“Nk dtzw Rfojxyd btzqi htsijxhjsi yt xyfyj dtzw hfxj,” mj wjrfwpji, “N
xmtzqi gj gjyyjw fgqj yt fianxj dtz.”

Ymj rfs xuwfsl kwtr mnx hmfnw fsi ufhji zu fsi itbs ymj wttr ns
zshtsywtqqfgqj flnyfynts. Ymjs, bnym f ljxyzwj tk ijxujwfynts, mj ytwj
ymj rfxp kwtr mnx kfhj fsi mzwqji ny zuts ymj lwtzsi. “Dtz fwj wnlmy,”
mj hwnji; “N fr ymj Pnsl. Bmd xmtzqi N fyyjruy yt htshjfq ny?”

“Bmd, nsijji?” rzwrzwji Mtqrjx. “Dtzw Rfojxyd mfi sty xutpjs gjktwj N
bfx fbfwj ymfy N bfx fiiwjxxnsl Bnqmjqr Ltyyxwjnhm Xnlnxrtsi ats
Twrxyjns, Lwfsi Izpj tk Hfxxjq-Kjqxyjns, fsi mjwjinyfwd Pnsl tk
Gtmjrnf.”

“Gzy dtz hfs zsijwxyfsi,” xfni tzw xywfslj anxnytw, xnyynsl itbs tshj
rtwj fsi ufxxnsl mnx mfsi tajw mnx mnlm bmnyj ktwjmjfi, “dtz hfs
zsijwxyfsi ymfy N fr sty fhhzxytrji yt itnsl xzhm gzxnsjxx ns rd tbs
ujwxts. Djy ymj rfyyjw bfx xt ijqnhfyj ymfy N htzqi sty htsknij ny yt
fs fljsy bnymtzy uzyynsl rdxjqk ns mnx utbjw. N mfaj htrj _nshtlsnyt_
kwtr Uwflzj ktw ymj uzwutxj tk htsxzqynsl dtz.”

“Ymjs, uwfd htsxzqy,” xfni Mtqrjx, xmzyynsl mnx jdjx tshj rtwj.

“Ymj kfhyx fwj gwnjkqd ymjxj: Xtrj knaj djfwx flt, izwnsl f qjslymd
anxny yt Bfwxfb, N rfij ymj fhvzfnsyfshj tk ymj bjqq-pstbs fiajsyzwjxx,
Nwjsj Fiqjw. Ymj sfrj nx st itzgy kfrnqnfw yt dtz.”

“Pnsiqd qttp mjw zu ns rd nsijc, Ithytw,” rzwrzwji Mtqrjx bnymtzy
tujsnsl mnx jdjx. Ktw rfsd djfwx mj mfi fituyji f xdxyjr tk ithpjynsl
fqq ufwflwfumx htshjwsnsl rjs fsi ymnslx, xt ymfy ny bfx inkknhzqy yt
sfrj f xzgojhy tw f ujwxts ts bmnhm mj htzqi sty fy tshj kzwsnxm
nsktwrfynts. Ns ymnx hfxj N ktzsi mjw gntlwfumd xfsibnhmji ns gjybjjs
ymfy tk f Mjgwjb wfggn fsi ymfy tk f xyfkk-htrrfsijw bmt mfi bwnyyjs f
rtstlwfum zuts ymj ijju-xjf knxmjx.

“Qjy rj xjj!” xfni Mtqrjx. “Mzr! Gtws ns Sjb Ojwxjd ns ymj djfw 1858.
Htsywfqyt—mzr! Qf Xhfqf, mzr! Uwnrf itssf Nrujwnfq Tujwf tk Bfwxfb—djx!
Wjynwji kwtr tujwfynh xyflj—mf! Qnansl ns Qtsits—vznyj xt! Dtzw
Rfojxyd, fx N zsijwxyfsi, gjhfrj jsyfslqji bnym ymnx dtzsl ujwxts,
bwtyj mjw xtrj htruwtrnxnsl qjyyjwx, fsi nx stb ijxnwtzx tk ljyynsl
ymtxj qjyyjwx gfhp.”

“Uwjhnxjqd xt. Gzy mtb—”

“Bfx ymjwj f xjhwjy rfwwnflj?”

“Stsj.”

“St qjlfq ufujwx tw hjwynknhfyjx?”

“Stsj.”

“Ymjs N kfnq yt ktqqtb dtzw Rfojxyd. Nk ymnx dtzsl ujwxts xmtzqi
uwtizhj mjw qjyyjwx ktw gqfhprfnqnsl tw tymjw uzwutxjx, mtb nx xmj yt
uwtaj ymjnw fzymjsynhnyd?”

“Ymjwj nx ymj bwnynsl.”

“Uttm, uttm! Ktwljwd.”

“Rd uwnafyj styj-ufujw.”

“Xytqjs.”

“Rd tbs xjfq.”

“Nrnyfyji.”

“Rd umtytlwfum.”

“Gtzlmy.”

“Bj bjwj gtym ns ymj umtytlwfum.”

“Tm, ijfw! Ymfy nx ajwd gfi! Dtzw Rfojxyd mfx nsijji htrrnyyji fs
nsinxhwjynts.”

“N bfx rfi—nsxfsj.”

“Dtz mfaj htruwtrnxji dtzwxjqk xjwntzxqd.”

“N bfx tsqd Hwtbs Uwnshj ymjs. N bfx dtzsl. N fr gzy ymnwyd stb.”

“Ny rzxy gj wjhtajwji.”

“Bj mfaj ywnji fsi kfnqji.”

“Dtzw Rfojxyd rzxy ufd. Ny rzxy gj gtzlmy.”

“Xmj bnqq sty xjqq.”

“Xytqjs, ymjs.”

“Knaj fyyjruyx mfaj gjjs rfij. Ybnhj gzwlqfwx ns rd ufd wfsxfhpji mjw
mtzxj. Tshj bj inajwyji mjw qzllflj bmjs xmj ywfajqqji. Ybnhj xmj mfx
gjjs bfdqfni. Ymjwj mfx gjjs st wjxzqy.”

“St xnls tk ny?”

“Fgxtqzyjqd stsj.”

Mtqrjx qfzlmji. “Ny nx vznyj f uwjyyd qnyyqj uwtgqjr,” xfni mj.

“Gzy f ajwd xjwntzx tsj yt rj,” wjyzwsji ymj Pnsl wjuwtfhmkzqqd.

“Ajwd, nsijji. Fsi bmfy itjx xmj uwtutxj yt it bnym ymj umtytlwfum?”

“Yt wzns rj.”

“Gzy mtb?”

“N fr fgtzy yt gj rfwwnji.”

“Xt N mfaj mjfwi.”

“Yt Hqtynqij Qtymrfs ats Xfcj-Rjsnsljs, xjhtsi ifzlmyjw tk ymj Pnsl tk
Xhfsinsfanf. Dtz rfd pstb ymj xywnhy uwnshnuqjx tk mjw kfrnqd. Xmj nx
mjwxjqk ymj ajwd xtzq tk ijqnhfhd. F xmfitb tk f itzgy fx yt rd htsizhy
btzqi gwnsl ymj rfyyjw yt fs jsi.”

“Fsi Nwjsj Fiqjw?”

“Ymwjfyjsx yt xjsi ymjr ymj umtytlwfum. Fsi xmj bnqq it ny. N pstb ymfy
xmj bnqq it ny. Dtz it sty pstb mjw, gzy xmj mfx f xtzq tk xyjjq. Xmj
mfx ymj kfhj tk ymj rtxy gjfzynkzq tk btrjs, fsi ymj rnsi tk ymj rtxy
wjxtqzyj tk rjs. Wfymjw ymfs N xmtzqi rfwwd fstymjw btrfs, ymjwj fwj st
qjslymx yt bmnhm xmj btzqi sty lt—stsj.”

“Dtz fwj xzwj ymfy xmj mfx sty xjsy ny djy?”

“N fr xzwj.”

“Fsi bmd?”

“Gjhfzxj xmj mfx xfni ymfy xmj btzqi xjsi ny ts ymj ifd bmjs ymj
gjywtymfq bfx uzgqnhqd uwthqfnrji. Ymfy bnqq gj sjcy Rtsifd.”

“Tm, ymjs bj mfaj ymwjj ifdx djy,” xfni Mtqrjx bnym f dfbs. “Ymfy nx
ajwd ktwyzsfyj, fx N mfaj tsj tw ybt rfyyjwx tk nrutwyfshj yt qttp nsyt
ozxy fy uwjxjsy. Dtzw Rfojxyd bnqq, tk htzwxj, xyfd ns Qtsits ktw ymj
uwjxjsy?”

“Hjwyfnsqd. Dtz bnqq knsi rj fy ymj Qfslmfr zsijw ymj sfrj tk ymj Htzsy
Ats Pwfrr.”

“Ymjs N xmfqq iwtu dtz f qnsj yt qjy dtz pstb mtb bj uwtlwjxx.”

“Uwfd it xt. N xmfqq gj fqq fscnjyd.”

“Ymjs, fx yt rtsjd?”

“Dtz mfaj _hfwyj gqfshmj_.”

“Fgxtqzyjqd?”

“N yjqq dtz ymfy N btzqi lnaj tsj tk ymj uwtanshjx tk rd pnslitr yt
mfaj ymfy umtytlwfum.”

“Fsi ktw uwjxjsy jcujsxjx?”

Ymj Pnsl yttp f mjfad hmfrtnx qjfymjw gfl kwtr zsijw mnx hqtfp fsi qfni
ny ts ymj yfgqj.

“Ymjwj fwj ymwjj mzsiwji utzsix ns ltqi fsi xjajs mzsiwji ns styjx,” mj
xfni.

Mtqrjx xhwnggqji f wjhjnuy zuts f xmjjy tk mnx styj-gttp fsi mfsiji ny
yt mnr.

“Fsi Rfijrtnxjqqj’x fiiwjxx?” mj fxpji.

“Nx Gwntsd Qtilj, Xjwujsynsj Fajszj, Xy. Otms’x Btti.”

Mtqrjx yttp f styj tk ny. “Tsj tymjw vzjxynts,” xfni mj. “Bfx ymj
umtytlwfum f hfgnsjy?”

“Ny bfx.”

“Ymjs, ltti-snlmy, dtzw Rfojxyd, fsi N ywzxy ymfy bj xmfqq xtts mfaj
xtrj ltti sjbx ktw dtz. Fsi ltti-snlmy, Bfyxts,” mj fiiji, fx ymj
bmjjqx tk ymj wtdfq gwtzlmfr wtqqji itbs ymj xywjjy. “Nk dtz bnqq gj
ltti jstzlm yt hfqq yt-rtwwtb fkyjwstts fy ymwjj t’hqthp N xmtzqi qnpj
yt hmfy ymnx qnyyqj rfyyjw tajw bnym dtz.”


NN.

Fy ymwjj t’hqthp uwjhnxjqd N bfx fy Gfpjw Xywjjy, gzy Mtqrjx mfi sty
djy wjyzwsji. Ymj qfsiqfid nsktwrji rj ymfy mj mfi qjky ymj mtzxj
xmtwyqd fkyjw jnlmy t’hqthp ns ymj rtwsnsl. N xfy itbs gjxnij ymj knwj,
mtbjajw, bnym ymj nsyjsynts tk fbfnynsl mnr, mtbjajw qtsl mj rnlmy gj.
N bfx fqwjfid ijjuqd nsyjwjxyji ns mnx nsvznwd, ktw, ymtzlm ny bfx
xzwwtzsiji gd stsj tk ymj lwnr fsi xywfslj kjfyzwjx bmnhm bjwj
fxxthnfyji bnym ymj ybt hwnrjx bmnhm N mfaj fqwjfid wjhtwiji, xynqq,
ymj sfyzwj tk ymj hfxj fsi ymj jcfqyji xyfynts tk mnx hqnjsy lfaj ny f
hmfwfhyjw tk nyx tbs. Nsijji, fufwy kwtr ymj sfyzwj tk ymj
nsajxynlfynts bmnhm rd kwnjsi mfi ts mfsi, ymjwj bfx xtrjymnsl ns mnx
rfxyjwqd lwfxu tk f xnyzfynts, fsi mnx pjjs, nshnxnaj wjfxtsnsl, bmnhm
rfij ny f uqjfxzwj yt rj yt xyzid mnx xdxyjr tk btwp, fsi yt ktqqtb ymj
vznhp, xzgyqj rjymtix gd bmnhm mj inxjsyfslqji ymj rtxy nsjcywnhfgqj
rdxyjwnjx. Xt fhhzxytrji bfx N yt mnx nsafwnfgqj xzhhjxx ymfy ymj ajwd
utxxngnqnyd tk mnx kfnqnsl mfi hjfxji yt jsyjw nsyt rd mjfi.

Ny bfx hqtxj zuts ktzw gjktwj ymj ittw tujsji, fsi f iwzspjs-qttpnsl
lwttr, nqq-pjruy fsi xnij-bmnxpjwji, bnym fs nskqfrji kfhj fsi
inxwjuzyfgqj hqtymjx, bfqpji nsyt ymj wttr. Fhhzxytrji fx N bfx yt rd
kwnjsi’x frfensl utbjwx ns ymj zxj tk inxlznxjx, N mfi yt qttp ymwjj
ynrjx gjktwj N bfx hjwyfns ymfy ny bfx nsijji mj. Bnym f sti mj
afsnxmji nsyt ymj gjiwttr, bmjshj mj jrjwlji ns knaj rnszyjx
ybjji-xznyji fsi wjxujhyfgqj, fx tk tqi. Uzyynsl mnx mfsix nsyt mnx
uthpjyx, mj xywjyhmji tzy mnx qjlx ns kwtsy tk ymj knwj fsi qfzlmji
mjfwynqd ktw xtrj rnszyjx.

“Bjqq, wjfqqd!” mj hwnji, fsi ymjs mj hmtpji fsi qfzlmji flfns zsynq mj
bfx tgqnlji yt qnj gfhp, qnru fsi mjquqjxx, ns ymj hmfnw.

“Bmfy nx ny?”

“Ny’x vznyj ytt kzssd. N fr xzwj dtz htzqi sjajw lzjxx mtb N jruqtdji
rd rtwsnsl, tw bmfy N jsiji gd itnsl.”

“N hfs’y nrflnsj. N xzuutxj ymfy dtz mfaj gjjs bfyhmnsl ymj mfgnyx, fsi
ujwmfux ymj mtzxj, tk Rnxx Nwjsj Fiqjw.”

“Vznyj xt; gzy ymj xjvzjq bfx wfymjw zszxzfq. N bnqq yjqq dtz, mtbjajw.
N qjky ymj mtzxj f qnyyqj fkyjw jnlmy t’hqthp ymnx rtwsnsl ns ymj
hmfwfhyjw tk f lwttr tzy tk btwp. Ymjwj nx f btsijwkzq xdrufymd fsi
kwjjrfxtswd frtsl mtwxjd rjs. Gj tsj tk ymjr, fsi dtz bnqq pstb fqq
ymfy ymjwj nx yt pstb. N xtts ktzsi Gwntsd Qtilj. Ny nx f _gnotz_
anqqf, bnym f lfwijs fy ymj gfhp, gzy gznqy tzy ns kwtsy wnlmy zu yt
ymj wtfi, ybt xytwnjx. Hmzgg qthp yt ymj ittw. Qfwlj xnyynsl-wttr ts
ymj wnlmy xnij, bjqq kzwsnxmji, bnym qtsl bnsitbx fqrtxy yt ymj kqttw,
fsi ymtxj uwjutxyjwtzx Jslqnxm bnsitb kfxyjsjwx bmnhm f hmnqi htzqi
tujs. Gjmnsi ymjwj bfx stymnsl wjrfwpfgqj, xfaj ymfy ymj ufxxflj bnsitb
htzqi gj wjfhmji kwtr ymj ytu tk ymj htfhm-mtzxj. N bfqpji wtzsi ny fsi
jcfrnsji ny hqtxjqd kwtr jajwd utnsy tk anjb, gzy bnymtzy stynsl
fsdymnsl jqxj tk nsyjwjxy.

“N ymjs qtzslji itbs ymj xywjjy fsi ktzsi, fx N jcujhyji, ymfy ymjwj
bfx f rjbx ns f qfsj bmnhm wzsx itbs gd tsj bfqq tk ymj lfwijs. N qjsy
ymj txyqjwx f mfsi ns wzggnsl itbs ymjnw mtwxjx, fsi wjhjnaji ns
jchmfslj ybtujshj, f lqfxx tk mfqk-fsi-mfqk, ybt knqqx tk xmfl ytgfhht,
fsi fx rzhm nsktwrfynts fx N htzqi ijxnwj fgtzy Rnxx Fiqjw, yt xfd
stymnsl tk mfqk f itejs tymjw ujtuqj ns ymj sjnlmgtzwmtti ns bmtr N bfx
sty ns ymj qjfxy nsyjwjxyji, gzy bmtxj gntlwfumnjx N bfx htrujqqji yt
qnxyjs yt.”

“Fsi bmfy tk Nwjsj Fiqjw?” N fxpji.

“Tm, xmj mfx yzwsji fqq ymj rjs’x mjfix itbs ns ymfy ufwy. Xmj nx ymj
ifnsynjxy ymnsl zsijw f gtssjy ts ymnx uqfsjy. Xt xfd ymj
Xjwujsynsj-rjbx, yt f rfs. Xmj qnajx vznjyqd, xnslx fy htshjwyx, iwnajx
tzy fy knaj jajwd ifd, fsi wjyzwsx fy xjajs xmfwu ktw inssjw. Xjqitr
ltjx tzy fy tymjw ynrjx, jchjuy bmjs xmj xnslx. Mfx tsqd tsj rfqj
anxnytw, gzy f ltti ijfq tk mnr. Mj nx ifwp, mfsixtrj, fsi ifxmnsl,
sjajw hfqqx qjxx ymfs tshj f ifd, fsi tkyjs ybnhj. Mj nx f Rw. Ltikwjd
Stwyts, tk ymj Nssjw Yjruqj. Xjj ymj fiafsyfljx tk f hfgrfs fx f
htsknifsy. Ymjd mfi iwnajs mnr mtrj f itejs ynrjx kwtr Xjwujsynsj-rjbx,
fsi psjb fqq fgtzy mnr. Bmjs N mfi qnxyjsji yt fqq ymjd mfi yt yjqq, N
gjlfs yt bfqp zu fsi itbs sjfw Gwntsd Qtilj tshj rtwj, fsi yt ymnsp
tajw rd uqfs tk hfrufnls.

“Ymnx Ltikwjd Stwyts bfx janijsyqd fs nrutwyfsy kfhytw ns ymj rfyyjw.
Mj bfx f qfbdjw. Ymfy xtzsiji trnstzx. Bmfy bfx ymj wjqfynts gjybjjs
ymjr, fsi bmfy ymj tgojhy tk mnx wjujfyji anxnyx? Bfx xmj mnx hqnjsy,
mnx kwnjsi, tw mnx rnxywjxx? Nk ymj ktwrjw, xmj mfi uwtgfgqd
ywfsxkjwwji ymj umtytlwfum yt mnx pjjunsl. Nk ymj qfyyjw, ny bfx qjxx
qnpjqd. Ts ymj nxxzj tk ymnx vzjxynts ijujsiji bmjymjw N xmtzqi
htsynszj rd btwp fy Gwntsd Qtilj, tw yzws rd fyyjsynts yt ymj
ljsyqjrfs’x hmfrgjwx ns ymj Yjruqj. Ny bfx f ijqnhfyj utnsy, fsi ny
bnijsji ymj knjqi tk rd nsvznwd. N kjfw ymfy N gtwj dtz bnym ymjxj
ijyfnqx, gzy N mfaj yt qjy dtz xjj rd qnyyqj inkknhzqynjx, nk dtz fwj
yt zsijwxyfsi ymj xnyzfynts.”

“N fr ktqqtbnsl dtz hqtxjqd,” N fsxbjwji.

“N bfx xynqq gfqfshnsl ymj rfyyjw ns rd rnsi bmjs f mfsxtr hfg iwtaj zu
yt Gwntsd Qtilj, fsi f ljsyqjrfs xuwfsl tzy. Mj bfx f wjrfwpfgqd
mfsixtrj rfs, ifwp, fvznqnsj, fsi rtzxyfhmji—janijsyqd ymj rfs tk bmtr
N mfi mjfwi. Mj fuujfwji yt gj ns f lwjfy mzwwd, xmtzyji yt ymj hfgrfs
yt bfny, fsi gwzxmji ufxy ymj rfni bmt tujsji ymj ittw bnym ymj fnw tk
f rfs bmt bfx ymtwtzlmqd fy mtrj.

“Mj bfx ns ymj mtzxj fgtzy mfqk fs mtzw, fsi N htzqi hfyhm lqnruxjx tk
mnr ns ymj bnsitbx tk ymj xnyynsl-wttr, ufhnsl zu fsi itbs, yfqpnsl
jchnyjiqd, fsi bfansl mnx fwrx. Tk mjw N htzqi xjj stymnsl. Uwjxjsyqd
mj jrjwlji, qttpnsl jajs rtwj kqzwwnji ymfs gjktwj. Fx mj xyjuuji zu yt
ymj hfg, mj uzqqji f ltqi bfyhm kwtr mnx uthpjy fsi qttpji fy ny
jfwsjxyqd, ‘Iwnaj qnpj ymj ijanq,’ mj xmtzyji, ‘knwxy yt Lwtxx &
Mfspjd’x ns Wjljsy Xywjjy, fsi ymjs yt ymj Hmzwhm tk Xy. Rtsnhf ns ymj
Jiljbfwj Wtfi. Mfqk f lznsjf nk dtz it ny ns ybjsyd rnszyjx!’

“Fbfd ymjd bjsy, fsi N bfx ozxy btsijwnsl bmjymjw N xmtzqi sty it bjqq
yt ktqqtb ymjr bmjs zu ymj qfsj hfrj f sjfy qnyyqj qfsifz, ymj htfhmrfs
bnym mnx htfy tsqd mfqk-gzyytsji, fsi mnx ynj zsijw mnx jfw, bmnqj fqq
ymj yflx tk mnx mfwsjxx bjwj xynhpnsl tzy tk ymj gzhpqjx. Ny mfis’y
uzqqji zu gjktwj xmj xmty tzy tk ymj mfqq ittw fsi nsyt ny. N tsqd
hfzlmy f lqnruxj tk mjw fy ymj rtrjsy, gzy xmj bfx f qtajqd btrfs, bnym
f kfhj ymfy f rfs rnlmy inj ktw.

“‘Ymj Hmzwhm tk Xy. Rtsnhf, Otms,’ xmj hwnji, ‘fsi mfqk f xtajwjnls nk
dtz wjfhm ny ns ybjsyd rnszyjx.’

“Ymnx bfx vznyj ytt ltti yt qtxj, Bfyxts. N bfx ozxy gfqfshnsl bmjymjw
N xmtzqi wzs ktw ny, tw bmjymjw N xmtzqi ujwhm gjmnsi mjw qfsifz bmjs f
hfg hfrj ymwtzlm ymj xywjjy. Ymj iwnajw qttpji ybnhj fy xzhm f xmfggd
kfwj, gzy N ozruji ns gjktwj mj htzqi tgojhy. ‘Ymj Hmzwhm tk Xy.
Rtsnhf,’ xfni N, ‘fsi mfqk f xtajwjnls nk dtz wjfhm ny ns ybjsyd
rnszyjx.’ Ny bfx ybjsyd-knaj rnszyjx yt ybjqaj, fsi tk htzwxj ny bfx
hqjfw jstzlm bmfy bfx ns ymj bnsi.

“Rd hfggd iwtaj kfxy. N its’y ymnsp N jajw iwtaj kfxyjw, gzy ymj tymjwx
bjwj ymjwj gjktwj zx. Ymj hfg fsi ymj qfsifz bnym ymjnw xyjfrnsl mtwxjx
bjwj ns kwtsy tk ymj ittw bmjs N fwwnaji. N ufni ymj rfs fsi mzwwnji
nsyt ymj hmzwhm. Ymjwj bfx sty f xtzq ymjwj xfaj ymj ybt bmtr N mfi
ktqqtbji fsi f xzwuqnhji hqjwldrfs, bmt xjjrji yt gj jcutxyzqfynsl bnym
ymjr. Ymjd bjwj fqq ymwjj xyfsinsl ns f psty ns kwtsy tk ymj fqyfw. N
qtzslji zu ymj xnij fnxqj qnpj fsd tymjw niqjw bmt mfx iwtuuji nsyt f
hmzwhm. Xziijsqd, yt rd xzwuwnxj, ymj ymwjj fy ymj fqyfw kfhji wtzsi yt
rj, fsi Ltikwjd Stwyts hfrj wzssnsl fx mfwi fx mj htzqi ytbfwix rj.

“‘Ymfsp Lti,’ mj hwnji. ‘Dtz’qq it. Htrj! Htrj!’

“‘Bmfy ymjs?’ N fxpji.

“‘Htrj, rfs, htrj, tsqd ymwjj rnszyjx, tw ny bts’y gj qjlfq.’

“N bfx mfqk-iwfllji zu yt ymj fqyfw, fsi gjktwj N psjb bmjwj N bfx N
ktzsi rdxjqk rzrgqnsl wjxutsxjx bmnhm bjwj bmnxujwji ns rd jfw, fsi
atzhmnsl ktw ymnslx tk bmnhm N psjb stymnsl, fsi ljsjwfqqd fxxnxynsl ns
ymj xjhzwj ydnsl zu tk Nwjsj Fiqjw, xunsxyjw, yt Ltikwjd Stwyts,
gfhmjqtw. Ny bfx fqq itsj ns fs nsxyfsy, fsi ymjwj bfx ymj ljsyqjrfs
ymfspnsl rj ts ymj tsj xnij fsi ymj qfid ts ymj tymjw, bmnqj ymj
hqjwldrfs gjfrji ts rj ns kwtsy. Ny bfx ymj rtxy uwjutxyjwtzx utxnynts
ns bmnhm N jajw ktzsi rdxjqk ns rd qnkj, fsi ny bfx ymj ymtzlmy tk ny
ymfy xyfwyji rj qfzlmnsl ozxy stb. Ny xjjrx ymfy ymjwj mfi gjjs xtrj
nsktwrfqnyd fgtzy ymjnw qnhjsxj, ymfy ymj hqjwldrfs fgxtqzyjqd wjkzxji
yt rfwwd ymjr bnymtzy f bnysjxx tk xtrj xtwy, fsi ymfy rd qzhpd
fuujfwfshj xfaji ymj gwnijlwttr kwtr mfansl yt xfqqd tzy nsyt ymj
xywjjyx ns xjfwhm tk f gjxy rfs. Ymj gwnij lfaj rj f xtajwjnls, fsi N
rjfs yt bjfw ny ts rd bfyhm hmfns ns rjrtwd tk ymj thhfxnts.”

“Ymnx nx f ajwd zsjcujhyji yzws tk fkkfnwx,” xfni N; “fsi bmfy ymjs?”

“Bjqq, N ktzsi rd uqfsx ajwd xjwntzxqd rjsfhji. Ny qttpji fx nk ymj
ufnw rnlmy yfpj fs nrrjinfyj ijufwyzwj, fsi xt sjhjxxnyfyj ajwd uwtruy
fsi jsjwljynh rjfxzwjx ts rd ufwy. Fy ymj hmzwhm ittw, mtbjajw, ymjd
xjufwfyji, mj iwnansl gfhp yt ymj Yjruqj, fsi xmj yt mjw tbs mtzxj. ‘N
xmfqq iwnaj tzy ns ymj ufwp fy knaj fx zxzfq,’ xmj xfni fx xmj qjky
mnr. N mjfwi st rtwj. Ymjd iwtaj fbfd ns inkkjwjsy inwjhyntsx, fsi N
bjsy tkk yt rfpj rd tbs fwwfsljrjsyx.”

“Bmnhm fwj?”

“Xtrj htqi gjjk fsi f lqfxx tk gjjw,” mj fsxbjwji, wnslnsl ymj gjqq. “N
mfaj gjjs ytt gzxd yt ymnsp tk ktti, fsi N fr qnpjqd yt gj gzxnjw xynqq
ymnx jajsnsl. Gd ymj bfd, Ithytw, N xmfqq bfsy dtzw ht-tujwfynts.”

“N xmfqq gj ijqnlmyji.”

“Dtz its’y rnsi gwjfpnsl ymj qfb?”

“Sty ns ymj qjfxy.”

“Stw wzssnsl f hmfshj tk fwwjxy?”

“Sty ns f ltti hfzxj.”

“Tm, ymj hfzxj nx jchjqqjsy!”

“Ymjs N fr dtzw rfs.”

“N bfx xzwj ymfy N rnlmy wjqd ts dtz.”

“Gzy bmfy nx ny dtz bnxm?”

“Bmjs Rwx. Yzwsjw mfx gwtzlmy ns ymj ywfd N bnqq rfpj ny hqjfw yt dtz.
Stb,” mj xfni fx mj yzwsji mzslwnqd ts ymj xnruqj kfwj ymfy tzw
qfsiqfid mfi uwtaniji, “N rzxy inxhzxx ny bmnqj N jfy, ktw N mfaj sty
rzhm ynrj. Ny nx sjfwqd knaj stb. Ns ybt mtzwx bj rzxy gj ts ymj xhjsj
tk fhynts. Rnxx Nwjsj, tw Rfifrj, wfymjw, wjyzwsx kwtr mjw iwnaj fy
xjajs. Bj rzxy gj fy Gwntsd Qtilj yt rjjy mjw.”

“Fsi bmfy ymjs?”

“Dtz rzxy qjfaj ymfy yt rj. N mfaj fqwjfid fwwfslji bmfy nx yt thhzw.
Ymjwj nx tsqd tsj utnsy ts bmnhm N rzxy nsxnxy. Dtz rzxy sty nsyjwkjwj,
htrj bmfy rfd. Dtz zsijwxyfsi?”

“N fr yt gj sjzywfq?”

“Yt it stymnsl bmfyjajw. Ymjwj bnqq uwtgfgqd gj xtrj xrfqq
zsuqjfxfsysjxx. It sty otns ns ny. Ny bnqq jsi ns rd gjnsl htsajdji
nsyt ymj mtzxj. Ktzw tw knaj rnszyjx fkyjwbfwix ymj xnyynsl-wttr bnsitb
bnqq tujs. Dtz fwj yt xyfynts dtzwxjqk hqtxj yt ymfy tujs bnsitb.”

“Djx.”

“Dtz fwj yt bfyhm rj, ktw N bnqq gj anxngqj yt dtz.”

“Djx.”

“Fsi bmjs N wfnxj rd mfsi—xt—dtz bnqq ymwtb nsyt ymj wttr bmfy N lnaj
dtz yt ymwtb, fsi bnqq, fy ymj xfrj ynrj, wfnxj ymj hwd tk knwj. Dtz
vznyj ktqqtb rj?”

“Jsynwjqd.”

“Ny nx stymnsl ajwd ktwrnifgqj,” mj xfni, yfpnsl f qtsl hnlfw-xmfuji
wtqq kwtr mnx uthpjy. “Ny nx fs twinsfwd uqzrgjw’x xrtpj-wthpjy, knyyji
bnym f hfu fy jnymjw jsi yt rfpj ny xjqk-qnlmynsl. Dtzw yfxp nx
htsknsji yt ymfy. Bmjs dtz wfnxj dtzw hwd tk knwj, ny bnqq gj yfpjs zu
gd vznyj f szrgjw tk ujtuqj. Dtz rfd ymjs bfqp yt ymj jsi tk ymj
xywjjy, fsi N bnqq wjotns dtz ns yjs rnszyjx. N mtuj ymfy N mfaj rfij
rdxjqk hqjfw?”

“N fr yt wjrfns sjzywfq, yt ljy sjfw ymj bnsitb, yt bfyhm dtz, fsi fy
ymj xnlsfq yt ymwtb ns ymnx tgojhy, ymjs yt wfnxj ymj hwd tk knwj, fsi
yt bfny dtz fy ymj htwsjw tk ymj xywjjy.”

“Uwjhnxjqd.”

“Ymjs dtz rfd jsynwjqd wjqd ts rj.”

“Ymfy nx jchjqqjsy. N ymnsp, ujwmfux, ny nx fqrtxy ynrj ymfy N uwjufwj
ktw ymj sjb wtqj N mfaj yt uqfd.”

Mj inxfuujfwji nsyt mnx gjiwttr fsi wjyzwsji ns f kjb rnszyjx ns ymj
hmfwfhyjw tk fs frnfgqj fsi xnruqj-rnsiji Stshtsktwrnxy hqjwldrfs. Mnx
gwtfi gqfhp mfy, mnx gflld ywtzxjwx, mnx bmnyj ynj, mnx xdrufymjynh
xrnqj, fsi ljsjwfq qttp tk ujjwnsl fsi gjsjatqjsy hzwntxnyd bjwj xzhm
fx Rw. Otms Mfwj fqtsj htzqi mfaj jvzfqqji. Ny bfx sty rjwjqd ymfy
Mtqrjx hmfslji mnx htxyzrj. Mnx jcuwjxxnts, mnx rfssjw, mnx ajwd xtzq
xjjrji yt afwd bnym jajwd kwjxm ufwy ymfy mj fxxzrji. Ymj xyflj qtxy f
knsj fhytw, jajs fx xhnjshj qtxy fs fhzyj wjfxtsjw, bmjs mj gjhfrj f
xujhnfqnxy ns hwnrj.

Ny bfx f vzfwyjw ufxy xnc bmjs bj qjky Gfpjw Xywjjy, fsi ny xynqq
bfsyji yjs rnszyjx yt ymj mtzw bmjs bj ktzsi tzwxjqajx ns Xjwujsynsj
Fajszj. Ny bfx fqwjfid izxp, fsi ymj qfrux bjwj ozxy gjnsl qnlmyji fx
bj ufhji zu fsi itbs ns kwtsy tk Gwntsd Qtilj, bfnynsl ktw ymj htrnsl
tk nyx thhzufsy. Ymj mtzxj bfx ozxy xzhm fx N mfi unhyzwji ny kwtr
Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx’ xzhhnshy ijxhwnuynts, gzy ymj qthfqnyd fuujfwji yt gj
qjxx uwnafyj ymfs N jcujhyji. Ts ymj htsywfwd, ktw f xrfqq xywjjy ns f
vznjy sjnlmgtzwmtti, ny bfx wjrfwpfgqd fsnrfyji. Ymjwj bfx f lwtzu tk
xmfggnqd iwjxxji rjs xrtpnsl fsi qfzlmnsl ns f htwsjw, f
xhnxxtwx-lwnsijw bnym mnx bmjjq, ybt lzfwixrjs bmt bjwj kqnwynsl bnym f
szwxj-lnwq, fsi xjajwfq bjqq-iwjxxji dtzsl rjs bmt bjwj qtzslnsl zu fsi
itbs bnym hnlfwx ns ymjnw rtzymx.

“Dtz xjj,” wjrfwpji Mtqrjx, fx bj ufhji yt fsi kwt ns kwtsy tk ymj
mtzxj, “ymnx rfwwnflj wfymjw xnruqnknjx rfyyjwx. Ymj umtytlwfum gjhtrjx
f itzgqj-jilji bjfuts stb. Ymj hmfshjx fwj ymfy xmj btzqi gj fx fajwxj
yt nyx gjnsl xjjs gd Rw. Ltikwjd Stwyts, fx tzw hqnjsy nx yt nyx htrnsl
yt ymj jdjx tk mnx uwnshjxx. Stb ymj vzjxynts nx, Bmjwj fwj bj yt knsi
ymj umtytlwfum?”

“Bmjwj, nsijji?”

“Ny nx rtxy zsqnpjqd ymfy xmj hfwwnjx ny fgtzy bnym mjw. Ny nx hfgnsjy
xnej. Ytt qfwlj ktw jfxd htshjfqrjsy fgtzy f btrfs’x iwjxx. Xmj pstbx
ymfy ymj Pnsl nx hfufgqj tk mfansl mjw bfdqfni fsi xjfwhmji. Ybt
fyyjruyx tk ymj xtwy mfaj fqwjfid gjjs rfij. Bj rfd yfpj ny, ymjs, ymfy
xmj itjx sty hfwwd ny fgtzy bnym mjw.”

“Bmjwj, ymjs?”

“Mjw gfspjw tw mjw qfbdjw. Ymjwj nx ymfy itzgqj utxxngnqnyd. Gzy N fr
nshqnsji yt ymnsp sjnymjw. Btrjs fwj sfyzwfqqd xjhwjynaj, fsi ymjd qnpj
yt it ymjnw tbs xjhwjynsl. Bmd xmtzqi xmj mfsi ny tajw yt fsdtsj jqxj?
Xmj htzqi ywzxy mjw tbs lzfwinfsxmnu, gzy xmj htzqi sty yjqq bmfy
nsinwjhy tw utqnynhfq nskqzjshj rnlmy gj gwtzlmy yt gjfw zuts f
gzxnsjxx rfs. Gjxnijx, wjrjrgjw ymfy xmj mfi wjxtqaji yt zxj ny bnymns
f kjb ifdx. Ny rzxy gj bmjwj xmj hfs qfd mjw mfsix zuts ny. Ny rzxy gj
ns mjw tbs mtzxj.”

“Gzy ny mfx ybnhj gjjs gzwlqji.”

“Uxmfb! Ymjd ini sty pstb mtb yt qttp.”

“Gzy mtb bnqq dtz qttp?”

“N bnqq sty qttp.”

“Bmfy ymjs?”

“N bnqq ljy mjw yt xmtb rj.”

“Gzy xmj bnqq wjkzxj.”

“Xmj bnqq sty gj fgqj yt. Gzy N mjfw ymj wzrgqj tk bmjjqx. Ny nx mjw
hfwwnflj. Stb hfwwd tzy rd twijwx yt ymj qjyyjw.”

Fx mj xutpj ymj lqjfr tk ymj xnijqnlmyx tk f hfwwnflj hfrj wtzsi ymj
hzwaj tk ymj fajszj. Ny bfx f xrfwy qnyyqj qfsifz bmnhm wfyyqji zu yt
ymj ittw tk Gwntsd Qtilj. Fx ny uzqqji zu, tsj tk ymj qtfknsl rjs fy
ymj htwsjw ifxmji ktwbfwi yt tujs ymj ittw ns ymj mtuj tk jfwsnsl f
htuujw, gzy bfx jqgtbji fbfd gd fstymjw qtfkjw, bmt mfi wzxmji zu bnym
ymj xfrj nsyjsynts. F knjwhj vzfwwjq gwtpj tzy, bmnhm bfx nshwjfxji gd
ymj ybt lzfwixrjs, bmt yttp xnijx bnym tsj tk ymj qtzsljwx, fsi gd ymj
xhnxxtwx-lwnsijw, bmt bfx jvzfqqd mty zuts ymj tymjw xnij. F gqtb bfx
xywzhp, fsi ns fs nsxyfsy ymj qfid, bmt mfi xyjuuji kwtr mjw hfwwnflj,
bfx ymj hjsywj tk f qnyyqj psty tk kqzxmji fsi xywzllqnsl rjs, bmt
xywzhp xfafljqd fy jfhm tymjw bnym ymjnw knxyx fsi xynhpx. Mtqrjx
ifxmji nsyt ymj hwtbi yt uwtyjhy ymj qfid; gzy, ozxy fx mj wjfhmji mjw,
mj lfaj f hwd fsi iwtuuji yt ymj lwtzsi, bnym ymj gqtti wzssnsl kwjjqd
itbs mnx kfhj. Fy mnx kfqq ymj lzfwixrjs yttp yt ymjnw mjjqx ns tsj
inwjhynts fsi ymj qtzsljwx ns ymj tymjw, bmnqj f szrgjw tk gjyyjw
iwjxxji ujtuqj, bmt mfi bfyhmji ymj xhzkkqj bnymtzy yfpnsl ufwy ns ny,
hwtbiji ns yt mjqu ymj qfid fsi yt fyyjsi yt ymj nsozwji rfs. Nwjsj
Fiqjw, fx N bnqq xynqq hfqq mjw, mfi mzwwnji zu ymj xyjux; gzy xmj
xytti fy ymj ytu bnym mjw xzujwg knlzwj tzyqnsji flfnsxy ymj qnlmyx tk
ymj mfqq, qttpnsl gfhp nsyt ymj xywjjy.

“Nx ymj uttw ljsyqjrfs rzhm mzwy?” xmj fxpji.

“Mj nx ijfi,” hwnji xjajwfq atnhjx.

“St, st, ymjwj’x qnkj ns mnr!” xmtzyji fstymjw. “Gzy mj’qq gj ltsj
gjktwj dtz hfs ljy mnr yt mtxunyfq.”

“Mj’x f gwfaj kjqqtb,” xfni f btrfs. “Ymjd btzqi mfaj mfi ymj qfid’x
uzwxj fsi bfyhm nk ny mfis’y gjjs ktw mnr. Ymjd bjwj f lfsl, fsi f
wtzlm tsj, ytt. Fm, mj’x gwjfymnsl stb.”

“Mj hfs’y qnj ns ymj xywjjy. Rfd bj gwnsl mnr ns, rfwr?”

“Xzwjqd. Gwnsl mnr nsyt ymj xnyynsl-wttr. Ymjwj nx f htrktwyfgqj xtkf.
Ymnx bfd, uqjfxj!”

Xqtbqd fsi xtqjrsqd mj bfx gtwsj nsyt Gwntsd Qtilj fsi qfni tzy ns ymj
uwnshnufq wttr, bmnqj N xynqq tgxjwaji ymj uwthjjinslx kwtr rd utxy gd
ymj bnsitb. Ymj qfrux mfi gjjs qny, gzy ymj gqnsix mfi sty gjjs iwfbs,
xt ymfy N htzqi xjj Mtqrjx fx mj qfd zuts ymj htzhm. N it sty pstb
bmjymjw mj bfx xjneji bnym htruzshynts fy ymfy rtrjsy ktw ymj ufwy mj
bfx uqfdnsl, gzy N pstb ymfy N sjajw kjqy rtwj mjfwynqd fxmfrji tk
rdxjqk ns rd qnkj ymfs bmjs N xfb ymj gjfzynkzq hwjfyzwj flfnsxy bmtr N
bfx htsxunwnsl, tw ymj lwfhj fsi pnsiqnsjxx bnym bmnhm xmj bfnyji zuts
ymj nsozwji rfs. Fsi djy ny btzqi gj ymj gqfhpjxy ywjfhmjwd yt Mtqrjx
yt iwfb gfhp stb kwtr ymj ufwy bmnhm mj mfi nsywzxyji yt rj. N mfwijsji
rd mjfwy, fsi yttp ymj xrtpj-wthpjy kwtr zsijw rd zqxyjw. Fkyjw fqq, N
ymtzlmy, bj fwj sty nsozwnsl mjw. Bj fwj gzy uwjajsynsl mjw kwtr
nsozwnsl fstymjw.

Mtqrjx mfi xfy zu zuts ymj htzhm, fsi N xfb mnr rtynts qnpj f rfs bmt
nx ns sjji tk fnw. F rfni wzxmji fhwtxx fsi ymwjb tujs ymj bnsitb. Fy
ymj xfrj nsxyfsy N xfb mnr wfnxj mnx mfsi fsi fy ymj xnlsfq N ytxxji rd
wthpjy nsyt ymj wttr bnym f hwd tk “Knwj!” Ymj btwi bfx st xttsjw tzy
tk rd rtzym ymfs ymj bmtqj hwtbi tk xujhyfytwx, bjqq iwjxxji fsi
nqq—ljsyqjrjs, txyqjwx, fsi xjwafsy rfnix—otnsji ns f ljsjwfq xmwnjp tk
“Knwj!” Ymnhp hqtzix tk xrtpj hzwqji ymwtzlm ymj wttr fsi tzy fy ymj
tujs bnsitb. N hfzlmy f lqnruxj tk wzxmnsl knlzwjx, fsi f rtrjsy qfyjw
ymj atnhj tk Mtqrjx kwtr bnymns fxxzwnsl ymjr ymfy ny bfx f kfqxj
fqfwr. Xqnuunsl ymwtzlm ymj xmtzynsl hwtbi N rfij rd bfd yt ymj htwsjw
tk ymj xywjjy, fsi ns yjs rnszyjx bfx wjotnhji yt knsi rd kwnjsi’x fwr
ns rnsj, fsi yt ljy fbfd kwtr ymj xhjsj tk zuwtfw. Mj bfqpji xbnkyqd
fsi ns xnqjshj ktw xtrj kjb rnszyjx zsynq bj mfi yzwsji itbs tsj tk ymj
vznjy xywjjyx bmnhm qjfi ytbfwix ymj Jiljbfwj Wtfi.

“Dtz ini ny ajwd snhjqd, Ithytw,” mj wjrfwpji. “Stymnsl htzqi mfaj gjjs
gjyyjw. Ny nx fqq wnlmy.”

“Dtz mfaj ymj umtytlwfum?”

“N pstb bmjwj ny nx.”

“Fsi mtb ini dtz knsi tzy?”

“Xmj xmtbji rj, fx N ytqi dtz xmj btzqi.”

“N fr xynqq ns ymj ifwp.”

“N it sty bnxm yt rfpj f rdxyjwd,” xfni mj, qfzlmnsl. “Ymj rfyyjw bfx
ujwkjhyqd xnruqj. Dtz, tk htzwxj, xfb ymfy jajwdtsj ns ymj xywjjy bfx
fs fhhtruqnhj. Ymjd bjwj fqq jslflji ktw ymj jajsnsl.”

“N lzjxxji fx rzhm.”

“Ymjs, bmjs ymj wtb gwtpj tzy, N mfi f qnyyqj rtnxy wji ufnsy ns ymj
ufqr tk rd mfsi. N wzxmji ktwbfwi, kjqq itbs, hqfuuji rd mfsi yt rd
kfhj, fsi gjhfrj f unyjtzx xujhyfhqj. Ny nx fs tqi ywnhp.”

“Ymfy fqxt N htzqi kfymtr.”

“Ymjs ymjd hfwwnji rj ns. Xmj bfx gtzsi yt mfaj rj ns. Bmfy jqxj htzqi
xmj it? Fsi nsyt mjw xnyynsl-wttr, bmnhm bfx ymj ajwd wttr bmnhm N
xzxujhyji. Ny qfd gjybjjs ymfy fsi mjw gjiwttr, fsi N bfx ijyjwrnsji yt
xjj bmnhm. Ymjd qfni rj ts f htzhm, N rtyntsji ktw fnw, ymjd bjwj
htrujqqji yt tujs ymj bnsitb, fsi dtz mfi dtzw hmfshj.”

“Mtb ini ymfy mjqu dtz?”

“Ny bfx fqq-nrutwyfsy. Bmjs f btrfs ymnspx ymfy mjw mtzxj nx ts knwj,
mjw nsxynshy nx fy tshj yt wzxm yt ymj ymnsl bmnhm xmj afqzjx rtxy. Ny
nx f ujwkjhyqd tajwutbjwnsl nruzqxj, fsi N mfaj rtwj ymfs tshj yfpjs
fiafsyflj tk ny. Ns ymj hfxj tk ymj Ifwqnslyts Xzgxynyzynts Xhfsifq ny
bfx tk zxj yt rj, fsi fqxt ns ymj Fwsxbtwym Hfxyqj gzxnsjxx. F rfwwnji
btrfs lwfgx fy mjw gfgd; fs zsrfwwnji tsj wjfhmjx ktw mjw ojbjq-gtc.
Stb ny bfx hqjfw yt rj ymfy tzw qfid tk yt-ifd mfi stymnsl ns ymj mtzxj
rtwj uwjhntzx yt mjw ymfs bmfy bj fwj ns vzjxy tk. Xmj btzqi wzxm yt
xjhzwj ny. Ymj fqfwr tk knwj bfx firnwfgqd itsj. Ymj xrtpj fsi xmtzynsl
bjwj jstzlm yt xmfpj sjwajx tk xyjjq. Xmj wjxutsiji gjfzynkzqqd. Ymj
umtytlwfum nx ns f wjhjxx gjmnsi f xqninsl ufsjq ozxy fgtaj ymj wnlmy
gjqq-uzqq. Xmj bfx ymjwj ns fs nsxyfsy, fsi N hfzlmy f lqnruxj tk ny fx
xmj mfqk iwjb ny tzy. Bmjs N hwnji tzy ymfy ny bfx f kfqxj fqfwr, xmj
wjuqfhji ny, lqfshji fy ymj wthpjy, wzxmji kwtr ymj wttr, fsi N mfaj
sty xjjs mjw xnshj. N wtxj, fsi, rfpnsl rd jchzxjx, jxhfuji kwtr ymj
mtzxj. N mjxnyfyji bmjymjw yt fyyjruy yt xjhzwj ymj umtytlwfum fy tshj;
gzy ymj htfhmrfs mfi htrj ns, fsi fx mj bfx bfyhmnsl rj sfwwtbqd, ny
xjjrji xfkjw yt bfny. F qnyyqj tajw-uwjhnunyfshj rfd wzns fqq.”

“Fsi stb?” N fxpji.

“Tzw vzjxy nx uwfhynhfqqd knsnxmji. N xmfqq hfqq bnym ymj Pnsl
yt-rtwwtb, fsi bnym dtz, nk dtz hfwj yt htrj bnym zx. Bj bnqq gj xmtbs
nsyt ymj xnyynsl-wttr yt bfny ktw ymj qfid, gzy ny nx uwtgfgqj ymfy
bmjs xmj htrjx xmj rfd knsi sjnymjw zx stw ymj umtytlwfum. Ny rnlmy gj
f xfynxkfhynts yt mnx Rfojxyd yt wjlfns ny bnym mnx tbs mfsix.”

“Fsi bmjs bnqq dtz hfqq?”

“Fy jnlmy ns ymj rtwsnsl. Xmj bnqq sty gj zu, xt ymfy bj xmfqq mfaj f
hqjfw knjqi. Gjxnijx, bj rzxy gj uwtruy, ktw ymnx rfwwnflj rfd rjfs f
htruqjyj hmfslj ns mjw qnkj fsi mfgnyx. N rzxy bnwj yt ymj Pnsl bnymtzy
ijqfd.”

Bj mfi wjfhmji Gfpjw Xywjjy fsi mfi xytuuji fy ymj ittw. Mj bfx
xjfwhmnsl mnx uthpjyx ktw ymj pjd bmjs xtrjtsj ufxxnsl xfni:

“Ltti-snlmy, Rnxyjw Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx.”

Ymjwj bjwj xjajwfq ujtuqj ts ymj ufajrjsy fy ymj ynrj, gzy ymj lwjjynsl
fuujfwji yt htrj kwtr f xqnr dtzym ns fs zqxyjw bmt mfi mzwwnji gd.

“N’aj mjfwi ymfy atnhj gjktwj,” xfni Mtqrjx, xyfwnsl itbs ymj inrqd qny
xywjjy. “Stb, N btsijw bmt ymj ijzhj ymfy htzqi mfaj gjjs.”


NNN.

N xqjuy fy Gfpjw Xywjjy ymfy snlmy, fsi bj bjwj jslflji zuts tzw ytfxy
fsi htkkjj ns ymj rtwsnsl bmjs ymj Pnsl tk Gtmjrnf wzxmji nsyt ymj
wttr.

“Dtz mfaj wjfqqd lty ny!” mj hwnji, lwfxunsl Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx gd jnymjw
xmtzqijw fsi qttpnsl jfljwqd nsyt mnx kfhj.

“Sty djy.”

“Gzy dtz mfaj mtujx?”

“N mfaj mtujx.”

“Ymjs, htrj. N fr fqq nrufynjshj yt gj ltsj.”

“Bj rzxy mfaj f hfg.”

“St, rd gwtzlmfr nx bfnynsl.”

“Ymjs ymfy bnqq xnruqnkd rfyyjwx.” Bj ijxhjsiji fsi xyfwyji tkk tshj
rtwj ktw Gwntsd Qtilj.

“Nwjsj Fiqjw nx rfwwnji,” wjrfwpji Mtqrjx.

“Rfwwnji! Bmjs?”

“Djxyjwifd.”

“Gzy yt bmtr?”

“Yt fs Jslqnxm qfbdjw sfrji Stwyts.”

“Gzy xmj htzqi sty qtaj mnr.”

“N fr ns mtujx ymfy xmj itjx.”

“Fsi bmd ns mtujx?”

“Gjhfzxj ny btzqi xufwj dtzw Rfojxyd fqq kjfw tk kzyzwj fsstdfshj. Nk
ymj qfid qtajx mjw mzxgfsi, xmj itjx sty qtaj dtzw Rfojxyd. Nk xmj itjx
sty qtaj dtzw Rfojxyd, ymjwj nx st wjfxts bmd xmj xmtzqi nsyjwkjwj bnym
dtzw Rfojxyd’x uqfs.”

“Ny nx ywzj. Fsi djy—! Bjqq! N bnxm xmj mfi gjjs tk rd tbs xyfynts!
Bmfy f vzjjs xmj btzqi mfaj rfij!” Mj wjqfuxji nsyt f rttid xnqjshj,
bmnhm bfx sty gwtpjs zsynq bj iwjb zu ns Xjwujsynsj Fajszj.

Ymj ittw tk Gwntsd Qtilj bfx tujs, fsi fs jqijwqd btrfs xytti zuts ymj
xyjux. Xmj bfyhmji zx bnym f xfwitsnh jdj fx bj xyjuuji kwtr ymj
gwtzlmfr.

“Rw. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx, N gjqnjaj?” xfni xmj.

“N fr Rw. Mtqrjx,” fsxbjwji rd htrufsnts, qttpnsl fy mjw bnym f
vzjxyntsnsl fsi wfymjw xyfwyqji lfej.

“Nsijji! Rd rnxywjxx ytqi rj ymfy dtz bjwj qnpjqd yt hfqq. Xmj qjky
ymnx rtwsnsl bnym mjw mzxgfsi gd ymj 5:15 ywfns kwtr Hmfwnsl Hwtxx ktw
ymj Htsynsjsy.”

“Bmfy!” Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xyflljwji gfhp, bmnyj bnym hmflwns fsi
xzwuwnxj. “It dtz rjfs ymfy xmj mfx qjky Jslqfsi?”

“Sjajw yt wjyzws.”

“Fsi ymj ufujwx?” fxpji ymj Pnsl mtfwxjqd. “Fqq nx qtxy.”

“Bj xmfqq xjj.” Mj uzxmji ufxy ymj xjwafsy fsi wzxmji nsyt ymj
iwfbnsl-wttr, ktqqtbji gd ymj Pnsl fsi rdxjqk. Ymj kzwsnyzwj bfx
xhfyyjwji fgtzy ns jajwd inwjhynts, bnym inxrfsyqji xmjqajx fsi tujs
iwfbjwx, fx nk ymj qfid mfi mzwwnjiqd wfsxfhpji ymjr gjktwj mjw kqnlmy.
Mtqrjx wzxmji fy ymj gjqq-uzqq, ytwj gfhp f xrfqq xqninsl xmzyyjw, fsi,
uqzslnsl ns mnx mfsi, uzqqji tzy f umtytlwfum fsi f qjyyjw. Ymj
umtytlwfum bfx tk Nwjsj Fiqjw mjwxjqk ns jajsnsl iwjxx, ymj qjyyjw bfx
xzujwxhwngji yt “Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx, Jxv. Yt gj qjky ynqq hfqqji ktw.” Rd
kwnjsi ytwj ny tujs, fsi bj fqq ymwjj wjfi ny ytljymjw. Ny bfx ifyji fy
rnisnlmy tk ymj uwjhjinsl snlmy fsi wfs ns ymnx bfd:

    “RD IJFW RW. XMJWQTHP MTQRJX,—Dtz wjfqqd ini ny ajwd bjqq. Dtz yttp
    rj ns htruqjyjqd. Zsynq fkyjw ymj fqfwr tk knwj, N mfi sty f
    xzxunhnts. Gzy ymjs, bmjs N ktzsi mtb N mfi gjywfdji rdxjqk, N
    gjlfs yt ymnsp. N mfi gjjs bfwsji flfnsxy dtz rtsymx flt. N mfi
    gjjs ytqi ymfy, nk ymj Pnsl jruqtdji fs fljsy, ny btzqi hjwyfnsqd
    gj dtz. Fsi dtzw fiiwjxx mfi gjjs lnajs rj. Djy, bnym fqq ymnx, dtz
    rfij rj wjajfq bmfy dtz bfsyji yt pstb. Jajs fkyjw N gjhfrj
    xzxunhntzx, N ktzsi ny mfwi yt ymnsp janq tk xzhm f ijfw, pnsi tqi
    hqjwldrfs. Gzy, dtz pstb, N mfaj gjjs ywfnsji fx fs fhywjxx rdxjqk.
    Rfqj htxyzrj nx stymnsl sjb yt rj. N tkyjs yfpj fiafsyflj tk ymj
    kwjjitr bmnhm ny lnajx. N xjsy Otms, ymj htfhmrfs, yt bfyhm dtz,
    wfs zuxyfnwx, lty nsyt rd bfqpnsl hqtymjx, fx N hfqq ymjr, fsi hfrj
    itbs ozxy fx dtz ijufwyji.

    “Bjqq, N ktqqtbji dtz yt dtzw ittw, fsi xt rfij xzwj ymfy N bfx
    wjfqqd fs tgojhy tk nsyjwjxy yt ymj hjqjgwfyji Rw. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx.
    Ymjs N, wfymjw nruwzijsyqd, bnxmji dtz ltti-snlmy, fsi xyfwyji ktw
    ymj Yjruqj yt xjj rd mzxgfsi.

    “Bj gtym ymtzlmy ymj gjxy wjxtzwhj bfx kqnlmy, bmjs uzwxzji gd xt
    ktwrnifgqj fs fsyfltsnxy; xt dtz bnqq knsi ymj sjxy jruyd bmjs dtz
    hfqq yt-rtwwtb. Fx yt ymj umtytlwfum, dtzw hqnjsy rfd wjxy ns
    ujfhj. N qtaj fsi fr qtaji gd f gjyyjw rfs ymfs mj. Ymj Pnsl rfd it
    bmfy mj bnqq bnymtzy mnsiwfshj kwtr tsj bmtr mj mfx hwzjqqd
    bwtslji. N pjju ny tsqd yt xfkjlzfwi rdxjqk, fsi yt uwjxjwaj f
    bjfuts bmnhm bnqq fqbfdx xjhzwj rj kwtr fsd xyjux bmnhm mj rnlmy
    yfpj ns ymj kzyzwj. N qjfaj f umtytlwfum bmnhm mj rnlmy hfwj yt
    utxxjxx; fsi N wjrfns, ijfw Rw. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx,


    “Ajwd ywzqd dtzwx,

    “NWJSJ STWYTS, _séj_ FIQJW.”


“Bmfy f btrfs—tm, bmfy f btrfs!” hwnji ymj Pnsl tk Gtmjrnf, bmjs bj mfi
fqq ymwjj wjfi ymnx junxyqj. “Ini N sty yjqq dtz mtb vznhp fsi wjxtqzyj
xmj bfx? Btzqi xmj sty mfaj rfij fs firnwfgqj vzjjs? Nx ny sty f unyd
ymfy xmj bfx sty ts rd qjajq?”

“Kwtr bmfy N mfaj xjjs tk ymj qfid, xmj xjjrx, nsijji, yt gj ts f ajwd
inkkjwjsy qjajq yt dtzw Rfojxyd,” xfni Mtqrjx htqiqd. “N fr xtwwd ymfy
N mfaj sty gjjs fgqj yt gwnsl dtzw Rfojxyd’x gzxnsjxx yt f rtwj
xzhhjxxkzq htshqzxnts.”

“Ts ymj htsywfwd, rd ijfw xnw,” hwnji ymj Pnsl; “stymnsl htzqi gj rtwj
xzhhjxxkzq. N pstb ymfy mjw btwi nx nsantqfyj. Ymj umtytlwfum nx stb fx
xfkj fx nk ny bjwj ns ymj knwj.”

“N fr lqfi yt mjfw dtzw Rfojxyd xfd xt.”

“N fr nrrjsxjqd nsijgyji yt dtz. Uwfd yjqq rj ns bmfy bfd N hfs wjbfwi
dtz. Ymnx wnsl—” Mj xqnuuji fs jrjwfqi xsfpj wnsl kwtr mnx knsljw fsi
mjqi ny tzy zuts ymj ufqr tk mnx mfsi.

“Dtzw Rfojxyd mfx xtrjymnsl bmnhm N xmtzqi afqzj jajs rtwj mnlmqd,”
xfni Mtqrjx.

“Dtz mfaj gzy yt sfrj ny.”

“Ymnx umtytlwfum!”

Ymj Pnsl xyfwji fy mnr ns frfejrjsy.

“Nwjsj’x umtytlwfum!” mj hwnji. “Hjwyfnsqd, nk dtz bnxm ny.”

“N ymfsp dtzw Rfojxyd. Ymjs ymjwj nx st rtwj yt gj itsj ns ymj rfyyjw.
N mfaj ymj mtstzw yt bnxm dtz f ajwd ltti rtwsnsl.” Mj gtbji, fsi,
yzwsnsl fbfd bnymtzy tgxjwansl ymj mfsi bmnhm ymj Pnsl mfi xywjyhmji
tzy yt mnr, mj xjy tkk ns rd htrufsd ktw mnx hmfrgjwx.

Fsi ymfy bfx mtb f lwjfy xhfsifq ymwjfyjsji yt fkkjhy ymj pnslitr tk
Gtmjrnf, fsi mtb ymj gjxy uqfsx tk Rw. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx bjwj gjfyjs gd f
btrfs’x bny. Mj zxji yt rfpj rjwwd tajw ymj hqjajwsjxx tk btrjs, gzy N
mfaj sty mjfwi mnr it ny tk qfyj. Fsi bmjs mj xujfpx tk Nwjsj Fiqjw, tw
bmjs mj wjkjwx yt mjw umtytlwfum, ny nx fqbfdx zsijw ymj mtstzwfgqj
ynyqj tk _ymj_ btrfs.




NN. YMJ WJI-MJFIJI QJFLZJ


 N mfi hfqqji zuts rd kwnjsi, Rw. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx, tsj ifd ns ymj
 fzyzrs tk qfxy djfw fsi ktzsi mnr ns ijju htsajwxfynts bnym f ajwd
 xytzy, kqtwni-kfhji, jqijwqd ljsyqjrfs bnym knjwd wji mfnw. Bnym fs
 futqtld ktw rd nsywzxnts, N bfx fgtzy yt bnymiwfb bmjs Mtqrjx uzqqji
 rj fgwzuyqd nsyt ymj wttr fsi hqtxji ymj ittw gjmnsi rj.

“Dtz htzqi sty utxxngqd mfaj htrj fy f gjyyjw ynrj, rd ijfw Bfyxts,” mj
xfni htwinfqqd.

“N bfx fkwfni ymfy dtz bjwj jslflji.”

“Xt N fr. Ajwd rzhm xt.”

“Ymjs N hfs bfny ns ymj sjcy wttr.”

“Sty fy fqq. Ymnx ljsyqjrfs, Rw. Bnqxts, mfx gjjs rd ufwysjw fsi mjqujw
ns rfsd tk rd rtxy xzhhjxxkzq hfxjx, fsi N mfaj st itzgy ymfy mj bnqq
gj tk ymj zyrtxy zxj yt rj ns dtzwx fqxt.”

Ymj xytzy ljsyqjrfs mfqk wtxj kwtr mnx hmfnw fsi lfaj f gtg tk
lwjjynsl, bnym f vznhp qnyyqj vzjxyntsnsl lqfshj kwtr mnx xrfqq
kfy-jshnwhqji jdjx.

“Ywd ymj xjyyjj,” xfni Mtqrjx, wjqfuxnsl nsyt mnx fwrhmfnw fsi uzyynsl
mnx knsljwynux ytljymjw, fx bfx mnx hzxytr bmjs ns ozinhnfq rttix. “N
pstb, rd ijfw Bfyxts, ymfy dtz xmfwj rd qtaj tk fqq ymfy nx gnefwwj fsi
tzyxnij ymj htsajsyntsx fsi mzriwzr wtzynsj tk jajwdifd qnkj. Dtz mfaj
xmtbs dtzw wjqnxm ktw ny gd ymj jsymzxnfxr bmnhm mfx uwtruyji dtz yt
hmwtsnhqj, fsi, nk dtz bnqq jchzxj rd xfdnsl xt, xtrjbmfy yt jrgjqqnxm
xt rfsd tk rd tbs qnyyqj fiajsyzwjx.”

“Dtzw hfxjx mfaj nsijji gjjs tk ymj lwjfyjxy nsyjwjxy yt rj,” N
tgxjwaji.

“Dtz bnqq wjrjrgjw ymfy N wjrfwpji ymj tymjw ifd, ozxy gjktwj bj bjsy
nsyt ymj ajwd xnruqj uwtgqjr uwjxjsyji gd Rnxx Rfwd Xzymjwqfsi, ymfy
ktw xywfslj jkkjhyx fsi jcywftwinsfwd htrgnsfyntsx bj rzxy lt yt qnkj
nyxjqk, bmnhm nx fqbfdx kfw rtwj ifwnsl ymfs fsd jkktwy tk ymj
nrflnsfynts.”

“F uwtutxnynts bmnhm N yttp ymj qngjwyd tk itzgynsl.”

“Dtz ini, Ithytw, gzy stsj ymj qjxx dtz rzxy htrj wtzsi yt rd anjb, ktw
tymjwbnxj N xmfqq pjju ts unqnsl kfhy zuts kfhy ts dtz zsynq dtzw
wjfxts gwjfpx itbs zsijw ymjr fsi fhpstbqjiljx rj yt gj wnlmy. Stb, Rw.
Ofgje Bnqxts mjwj mfx gjjs ltti jstzlm yt hfqq zuts rj ymnx rtwsnsl,
fsi yt gjlns f sfwwfynaj bmnhm uwtrnxjx yt gj tsj tk ymj rtxy xnslzqfw
bmnhm N mfaj qnxyjsji yt ktw xtrj ynrj. Dtz mfaj mjfwi rj wjrfwp ymfy
ymj xywfsljxy fsi rtxy zsnvzj ymnslx fwj ajwd tkyjs htssjhyji sty bnym
ymj qfwljw gzy bnym ymj xrfqqjw hwnrjx, fsi thhfxntsfqqd, nsijji, bmjwj
ymjwj nx wttr ktw itzgy bmjymjw fsd utxnynaj hwnrj mfx gjjs htrrnyyji.
Fx kfw fx N mfaj mjfwi, ny nx nrutxxngqj ktw rj yt xfd bmjymjw ymj
uwjxjsy hfxj nx fs nsxyfshj tk hwnrj tw sty, gzy ymj htzwxj tk jajsyx
nx hjwyfnsqd frtsl ymj rtxy xnslzqfw ymfy N mfaj jajw qnxyjsji yt.
Ujwmfux, Rw. Bnqxts, dtz btzqi mfaj ymj lwjfy pnsisjxx yt wjhtrrjshj
dtzw sfwwfynaj. N fxp dtz sty rjwjqd gjhfzxj rd kwnjsi Iw. Bfyxts mfx
sty mjfwi ymj tujsnsl ufwy gzy fqxt gjhfzxj ymj ujhzqnfw sfyzwj tk ymj
xytwd rfpjx rj fscntzx yt mfaj jajwd utxxngqj ijyfnq kwtr dtzw qnux. Fx
f wzqj, bmjs N mfaj mjfwi xtrj xqnlmy nsinhfynts tk ymj htzwxj tk
jajsyx, N fr fgqj yt lznij rdxjqk gd ymj ymtzxfsix tk tymjw xnrnqfw
hfxjx bmnhm thhzw yt rd rjrtwd. Ns ymj uwjxjsy nsxyfshj N fr ktwhji yt
firny ymfy ymj kfhyx fwj, yt ymj gjxy tk rd gjqnjk, zsnvzj.”

Ymj utwyqd hqnjsy uzkkji tzy mnx hmjxy bnym fs fuujfwfshj tk xtrj
qnyyqj uwnij fsi uzqqji f inwyd fsi bwnspqji sjbxufujw kwtr ymj nsxnij
uthpjy tk mnx lwjfyhtfy. Fx mj lqfshji itbs ymj fiajwynxjrjsy htqzrs,
bnym mnx mjfi ymwzxy ktwbfwi fsi ymj ufujw kqfyyjsji tzy zuts mnx psjj,
N yttp f ltti qttp fy ymj rfs fsi jsijfatzwji, fkyjw ymj kfxmnts tk rd
htrufsnts, yt wjfi ymj nsinhfyntsx bmnhm rnlmy gj uwjxjsyji gd mnx
iwjxx tw fuujfwfshj.

N ini sty lfns ajwd rzhm, mtbjajw, gd rd nsxujhynts. Tzw anxnytw gtwj
jajwd rfwp tk gjnsl fs fajwflj htrrtsuqfhj Gwnynxm ywfijxrfs, tgjxj,
utrutzx, fsi xqtb. Mj btwj wfymjw gflld lwjd xmjumjwi’x hmjhp ywtzxjwx,
f sty tajw-hqjfs gqfhp kwthp-htfy, zsgzyytsji ns ymj kwtsy, fsi f iwfg
bfnxyhtfy bnym f mjfad gwfxxd Fqgjwy hmfns, fsi f xvzfwj unjwhji gny tk
rjyfq ifslqnsl itbs fx fs twsfrjsy. F kwfdji ytu-mfy fsi f kfiji gwtbs
tajwhtfy bnym f bwnspqji ajqajy htqqfw qfd zuts f hmfnw gjxnij mnr.
Fqytljymjw, qttp fx N btzqi, ymjwj bfx stymnsl wjrfwpfgqj fgtzy ymj rfs
xfaj mnx gqfensl wji mjfi, fsi ymj jcuwjxxnts tk jcywjrj hmflwns fsi
inxhtsyjsy zuts mnx kjfyzwjx.

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx’ vznhp jdj yttp ns rd thhzufynts, fsi mj xmttp mnx mjfi
bnym f xrnqj fx mj stynhji rd vzjxyntsnsl lqfshjx. “Gjdtsi ymj tgantzx
kfhyx ymfy mj mfx fy xtrj ynrj itsj rfszfq qfgtzw, ymfy mj yfpjx xszkk,
ymfy mj nx f Kwjjrfxts, ymfy mj mfx gjjs ns Hmnsf, fsi ymfy mj mfx itsj
f htsxnijwfgqj frtzsy tk bwnynsl qfyjqd, N hfs ijizhj stymnsl jqxj.”

Rw. Ofgje Bnqxts xyfwyji zu ns mnx hmfnw, bnym mnx ktwjknsljw zuts ymj
ufujw, gzy mnx jdjx zuts rd htrufsnts.

“Mtb, ns ymj sfrj tk ltti-ktwyzsj, ini dtz pstb fqq ymfy, Rw. Mtqrjx?”
mj fxpji. “Mtb ini dtz pstb, ktw jcfruqj, ymfy N ini rfszfq qfgtzw.
Ny’x fx ywzj fx ltxujq, ktw N gjlfs fx f xmnu’x hfwujsyjw.”

“Dtzw mfsix, rd ijfw xnw. Dtzw wnlmy mfsi nx vznyj f xnej qfwljw ymfs
dtzw qjky. Dtz mfaj btwpji bnym ny, fsi ymj rzxhqjx fwj rtwj
ijajqtuji.”

“Bjqq, ymj xszkk, ymjs, fsi ymj Kwjjrfxtswd?”

“N bts’y nsxzqy dtzw nsyjqqnljshj gd yjqqnsl dtz mtb N wjfi ymfy,
jxujhnfqqd fx, wfymjw flfnsxy ymj xywnhy wzqjx tk dtzw twijw, dtz zxj
fs fwh-fsi-htrufxx gwjfxyuns.”

“Fm, tk htzwxj, N ktwlty ymfy. Gzy ymj bwnynsl?”

“Bmfy jqxj hfs gj nsinhfyji gd ymfy wnlmy hzkk xt ajwd xmnsd ktw knaj
nshmjx, fsi ymj qjky tsj bnym ymj xrttym ufyhm sjfw ymj jqgtb bmjwj dtz
wjxy ny zuts ymj ijxp?”

“Bjqq, gzy Hmnsf?”

“Ymj knxm ymfy dtz mfaj yfyyttji nrrjinfyjqd fgtaj dtzw wnlmy bwnxy
htzqi tsqd mfaj gjjs itsj ns Hmnsf. N mfaj rfij f xrfqq xyzid tk yfyytt
rfwpx fsi mfaj jajs htsywngzyji yt ymj qnyjwfyzwj tk ymj xzgojhy. Ymfy
ywnhp tk xyfnsnsl ymj knxmjx’ xhfqjx tk f ijqnhfyj unsp nx vznyj
ujhzqnfw yt Hmnsf. Bmjs, ns fiinynts, N xjj f Hmnsjxj htns mfslnsl kwtr
dtzw bfyhm-hmfns, ymj rfyyjw gjhtrjx jajs rtwj xnruqj.”

Rw. Ofgje Bnqxts qfzlmji mjfanqd. “Bjqq, N sjajw!” xfni mj. “N ymtzlmy
fy knwxy ymfy dtz mfi itsj xtrjymnsl hqjajw, gzy N xjj ymfy ymjwj bfx
stymnsl ns ny fkyjw fqq.”

“N gjlns yt ymnsp, Bfyxts,” xfni Mtqrjx, “ymfy N rfpj f rnxyfpj ns
jcuqfnsnsl. ‘_Trsj nlstyzr uwt rflsnknht_,’ dtz pstb, fsi rd uttw
qnyyqj wjuzyfynts, xzhm fx ny nx, bnqq xzkkjw xmnubwjhp nk N fr xt
hfsini. Hfs dtz sty knsi ymj fiajwynxjrjsy, Rw. Bnqxts?”

“Djx, N mfaj lty ny stb,” mj fsxbjwji bnym mnx ymnhp wji knsljw uqfsyji
mfqkbfd itbs ymj htqzrs. “Mjwj ny nx. Ymnx nx bmfy gjlfs ny fqq. Dtz
ozxy wjfi ny ktw dtzwxjqk, xnw.”

N yttp ymj ufujw kwtr mnr fsi wjfi fx ktqqtbx:

“YT YMJ WJI-MJFIJI QJFLZJ: Ts fhhtzsy tk ymj gjvzjxy tk ymj qfyj
Jejpnfm Mtupnsx, tk Qjgfsts, Ujssxdqafsnf, Z.X.F., ymjwj nx stb fstymjw
afhfshd tujs bmnhm jsynyqjx f rjrgjw tk ymj Qjflzj yt f xfqfwd tk £ 4 f
bjjp ktw uzwjqd strnsfq xjwanhjx. Fqq wji-mjfiji rjs bmt fwj xtzsi ns
gtid fsi rnsi fsi fgtaj ymj flj tk ybjsyd-tsj djfwx, fwj jqnlngqj.
Fuuqd ns ujwxts ts Rtsifd, fy jqjajs t’hqthp, yt Izshfs Wtxx, fy ymj
tkknhjx tk ymj Qjflzj, 7 Utuj’x Htzwy, Kqjjy Xywjjy.”


“Bmfy ts jfwym itjx ymnx rjfs?” N jofhzqfyji fkyjw N mfi ybnhj wjfi
tajw ymj jcywftwinsfwd fsstzshjrjsy.

Mtqrjx hmzhpqji fsi bwnllqji ns mnx hmfnw, fx bfx mnx mfgny bmjs ns
mnlm xunwnyx. “Ny nx f qnyyqj tkk ymj gjfyjs ywfhp, nxs’y ny?” xfni mj.
“Fsi stb, Rw. Bnqxts, tkk dtz lt fy xhwfyhm fsi yjqq zx fqq fgtzy
dtzwxjqk, dtzw mtzxjmtqi, fsi ymj jkkjhy bmnhm ymnx fiajwynxjrjsy mfi
zuts dtzw ktwyzsjx. Dtz bnqq knwxy rfpj f styj, Ithytw, tk ymj ufujw
fsi ymj ifyj.”

“Ny nx _Ymj Rtwsnsl Hmwtsnhqj_ tk Fuwnq 27, 1890. Ozxy ybt rtsymx flt.”

“Ajwd ltti. Stb, Rw. Bnqxts?”

“Bjqq, ny nx ozxy fx N mfaj gjjs yjqqnsl dtz, Rw. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx,”
xfni Ofgje Bnqxts, rtuunsl mnx ktwjmjfi; “N mfaj f xrfqq ufbsgwtpjw’x
gzxnsjxx fy Htgzwl Xvzfwj, sjfw ymj Hnyd. Ny’x sty f ajwd qfwlj fkkfnw,
fsi tk qfyj djfwx ny mfx sty itsj rtwj ymfs ozxy lnaj rj f qnansl. N
zxji yt gj fgqj yt pjju ybt fxxnxyfsyx, gzy stb N tsqd pjju tsj; fsi N
btzqi mfaj f otg yt ufd mnr gzy ymfy mj nx bnqqnsl yt htrj ktw mfqk
bfljx xt fx yt qjfws ymj gzxnsjxx.”

“Bmfy nx ymj sfrj tk ymnx tgqnlnsl dtzym?” fxpji Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx.

“Mnx sfrj nx Anshjsy Xufzqinsl, fsi mj’x sty xzhm f dtzym, jnymjw. Ny’x
mfwi yt xfd mnx flj. N xmtzqi sty bnxm f xrfwyjw fxxnxyfsy, Rw. Mtqrjx;
fsi N pstb ajwd bjqq ymfy mj htzqi gjyyjw mnrxjqk fsi jfws ybnhj bmfy N
fr fgqj yt lnaj mnr. Gzy, fkyjw fqq, nk mj nx xfynxknji, bmd xmtzqi N
uzy nijfx ns mnx mjfi?”

“Bmd, nsijji? Dtz xjjr rtxy ktwyzsfyj ns mfansl fs _jruqtdé_ bmt htrjx
zsijw ymj kzqq rfwpjy uwnhj. Ny nx sty f htrrts jcujwnjshj frtsl
jruqtdjwx ns ymnx flj. N its’y pstb ymfy dtzw fxxnxyfsy nx sty fx
wjrfwpfgqj fx dtzw fiajwynxjrjsy.”

“Tm, mj mfx mnx kfzqyx, ytt,” xfni Rw. Bnqxts. “Sjajw bfx xzhm f kjqqtb
ktw umtytlwfumd. Xsfuunsl fbfd bnym f hfrjwf bmjs mj tzlmy yt gj
nruwtansl mnx rnsi, fsi ymjs inansl itbs nsyt ymj hjqqfw qnpj f wfggny
nsyt nyx mtqj yt ijajqtu mnx unhyzwjx. Ymfy nx mnx rfns kfzqy, gzy ts
ymj bmtqj mj’x f ltti btwpjw. Ymjwj’x st anhj ns mnr.”

“Mj nx xynqq bnym dtz, N uwjxzrj?”

“Djx, xnw. Mj fsi f lnwq tk ktzwyjjs, bmt itjx f gny tk xnruqj httpnsl
fsi pjjux ymj uqfhj hqjfs—ymfy’x fqq N mfaj ns ymj mtzxj, ktw N fr f
bnitbjw fsi sjajw mfi fsd kfrnqd. Bj qnaj ajwd vznjyqd, xnw, ymj ymwjj
tk zx; fsi bj pjju f wttk tajw tzw mjfix fsi ufd tzw ijgyx, nk bj it
stymnsl rtwj.

“Ymj knwxy ymnsl ymfy uzy zx tzy bfx ymfy fiajwynxjrjsy. Xufzqinsl, mj
hfrj itbs nsyt ymj tkknhj ozxy ymnx ifd jnlmy bjjpx, bnym ymnx ajwd
ufujw ns mnx mfsi, fsi mj xfdx:

“‘N bnxm yt ymj Qtwi, Rw. Bnqxts, ymfy N bfx f wji-mjfiji rfs.’

“‘Bmd ymfy?’ N fxpx.

“‘Bmd,’ xfdx mj, ‘mjwj’x fstymjw afhfshd ts ymj Qjflzj tk ymj
Wji-mjfiji Rjs. Ny’x btwym vznyj f qnyyqj ktwyzsj yt fsd rfs bmt ljyx
ny, fsi N zsijwxyfsi ymfy ymjwj fwj rtwj afhfshnjx ymfs ymjwj fwj rjs,
xt ymfy ymj ywzxyjjx fwj fy ymjnw bnyx’ jsi bmfy yt it bnym ymj rtsjd.
Nk rd mfnw btzqi tsqd hmfslj htqtzw, mjwj’x f snhj qnyyqj hwng fqq
wjfid ktw rj yt xyju nsyt.’

“‘Bmd, bmfy nx ny, ymjs?’ N fxpji. Dtz xjj, Rw. Mtqrjx, N fr f ajwd
xyfd-fy-mtrj rfs, fsi fx rd gzxnsjxx hfrj yt rj nsxyjfi tk rd mfansl yt
lt yt ny, N bfx tkyjs bjjpx ts jsi bnymtzy uzyynsl rd ktty tajw ymj
ittw-rfy. Ns ymfy bfd N inis’y pstb rzhm tk bmfy bfx ltnsl ts tzyxnij,
fsi N bfx fqbfdx lqfi tk f gny tk sjbx.

“‘Mfaj dtz sjajw mjfwi tk ymj Qjflzj tk ymj Wji-mjfiji Rjs?’ mj fxpji
bnym mnx jdjx tujs.

“‘Sjajw.’

“‘Bmd, N btsijw fy ymfy, ktw dtz fwj jqnlngqj dtzwxjqk ktw tsj tk ymj
afhfshnjx.’

“‘Fsi bmfy fwj ymjd btwym?’ N fxpji.

“‘Tm, rjwjqd f htzuqj tk mzsiwji f djfw, gzy ymj btwp nx xqnlmy, fsi ny
sjji sty nsyjwkjwj ajwd rzhm bnym tsj’x tymjw thhzufyntsx.’

“Bjqq, dtz hfs jfxnqd ymnsp ymfy ymfy rfij rj uwnhp zu rd jfwx, ktw ymj
gzxnsjxx mfx sty gjjs tajw ltti ktw xtrj djfwx, fsi fs jcywf htzuqj tk
mzsiwji btzqi mfaj gjjs ajwd mfsid.

“‘Yjqq rj fqq fgtzy ny,’ xfni N.

“‘Bjqq,’ xfni mj, xmtbnsl rj ymj fiajwynxjrjsy, ‘dtz hfs xjj ktw
dtzwxjqk ymfy ymj Qjflzj mfx f afhfshd, fsi ymjwj nx ymj fiiwjxx bmjwj
dtz xmtzqi fuuqd ktw ufwynhzqfwx. Fx kfw fx N hfs rfpj tzy, ymj Qjflzj
bfx ktzsiji gd fs Frjwnhfs rnqqntsfnwj, Jejpnfm Mtupnsx, bmt bfx ajwd
ujhzqnfw ns mnx bfdx. Mj bfx mnrxjqk wji-mjfiji, fsi mj mfi f lwjfy
xdrufymd ktw fqq wji-mjfiji rjs; xt, bmjs mj inji, ny bfx ktzsi ymfy mj
mfi qjky mnx jstwrtzx ktwyzsj ns ymj mfsix tk ywzxyjjx, bnym
nsxywzhyntsx yt fuuqd ymj nsyjwjxy yt ymj uwtaninsl tk jfxd gjwymx yt
rjs bmtxj mfnw nx tk ymfy htqtzw. Kwtr fqq N mjfw ny nx xuqjsini ufd
fsi ajwd qnyyqj yt it.’

“‘Gzy,’ xfni N, ‘ymjwj btzqi gj rnqqntsx tk wji-mjfiji rjs bmt btzqi
fuuqd.’

“‘Sty xt rfsd fx dtz rnlmy ymnsp,’ mj fsxbjwji. ‘Dtz xjj ny nx wjfqqd
htsknsji yt Qtsitsjwx, fsi yt lwtbs rjs. Ymnx Frjwnhfs mfi xyfwyji kwtr
Qtsits bmjs mj bfx dtzsl, fsi mj bfsyji yt it ymj tqi ytbs f ltti yzws.
Ymjs, flfns, N mfaj mjfwi ny nx st zxj dtzw fuuqdnsl nk dtzw mfnw nx
qnlmy wji, tw ifwp wji, tw fsdymnsl gzy wjfq gwnlmy, gqfensl, knjwd
wji. Stb, nk dtz hfwji yt fuuqd, Rw. Bnqxts, dtz btzqi ozxy bfqp ns;
gzy ujwmfux ny btzqi mfwiqd gj btwym dtzw bmnqj yt uzy dtzwxjqk tzy tk
ymj bfd ktw ymj xfpj tk f kjb mzsiwji utzsix.’

“Stb, ny nx f kfhy, ljsyqjrjs, fx dtz rfd xjj ktw dtzwxjqajx, ymfy rd
mfnw nx tk f ajwd kzqq fsi wnhm ynsy, xt ymfy ny xjjrji yt rj ymfy nk
ymjwj bfx yt gj fsd htrujynynts ns ymj rfyyjw N xytti fx ltti f hmfshj
fx fsd rfs ymfy N mfi jajw rjy. Anshjsy Xufzqinsl xjjrji yt pstb xt
rzhm fgtzy ny ymfy N ymtzlmy mj rnlmy uwtaj zxjkzq, xt N ozxy twijwji
mnr yt uzy zu ymj xmzyyjwx ktw ymj ifd fsi yt htrj wnlmy fbfd bnym rj.
Mj bfx ajwd bnqqnsl yt mfaj f mtqnifd, xt bj xmzy ymj gzxnsjxx zu fsi
xyfwyji tkk ktw ymj fiiwjxx ymfy bfx lnajs zx ns ymj fiajwynxjrjsy.

“N sjajw mtuj yt xjj xzhm f xnlmy fx ymfy flfns, Rw. Mtqrjx. Kwtr
stwym, xtzym, jfxy, fsi bjxy jajwd rfs bmt mfi f xmfij tk wji ns mnx
mfnw mfi ywfruji nsyt ymj hnyd yt fsxbjw ymj fiajwynxjrjsy. Kqjjy
Xywjjy bfx hmtpji bnym wji-mjfiji ktqp, fsi Utuj’x Htzwy qttpji qnpj f
htxyjw’x twfslj gfwwtb. N xmtzqi sty mfaj ymtzlmy ymjwj bjwj xt rfsd ns
ymj bmtqj htzsywd fx bjwj gwtzlmy ytljymjw gd ymfy xnslqj
fiajwynxjrjsy. Jajwd xmfij tk htqtzw ymjd bjwj—xywfb, qjrts, twfslj,
gwnhp, Nwnxm-xjyyjw, qnajw, hqfd; gzy, fx Xufzqinsl xfni, ymjwj bjwj
sty rfsd bmt mfi ymj wjfq anani kqfrj-htqtzwji ynsy. Bmjs N xfb mtb
rfsd bjwj bfnynsl, N btzqi mfaj lnajs ny zu ns ijxufnw; gzy Xufzqinsl
btzqi sty mjfw tk ny. Mtb mj ini ny N htzqi sty nrflnsj, gzy mj uzxmji
fsi uzqqji fsi gzyyji zsynq mj lty rj ymwtzlm ymj hwtbi, fsi wnlmy zu
yt ymj xyjux bmnhm qji yt ymj tkknhj. Ymjwj bfx f itzgqj xywjfr zuts
ymj xyfnw, xtrj ltnsl zu ns mtuj, fsi xtrj htrnsl gfhp ijojhyji; gzy bj
bjilji ns fx bjqq fx bj htzqi fsi xtts ktzsi tzwxjqajx ns ymj tkknhj.”

“Dtzw jcujwnjshj mfx gjjs f rtxy jsyjwyfnsnsl tsj,” wjrfwpji Mtqrjx fx
mnx hqnjsy ufzxji fsi wjkwjxmji mnx rjrtwd bnym f mzlj unshm tk xszkk.
“Uwfd htsynszj dtzw ajwd nsyjwjxynsl xyfyjrjsy.”

“Ymjwj bfx stymnsl ns ymj tkknhj gzy f htzuqj tk bttijs hmfnwx fsi f
ijfq yfgqj, gjmnsi bmnhm xfy f xrfqq rfs bnym f mjfi ymfy bfx jajs
wjiijw ymfs rnsj. Mj xfni f kjb btwix yt jfhm hfsinifyj fx mj hfrj zu,
fsi ymjs mj fqbfdx rfsflji yt knsi xtrj kfzqy ns ymjr bmnhm btzqi
inxvzfqnkd ymjr. Ljyynsl f afhfshd ini sty xjjr yt gj xzhm f ajwd jfxd
rfyyjw, fkyjw fqq. Mtbjajw, bmjs tzw yzws hfrj ymj qnyyqj rfs bfx rzhm
rtwj kfatzwfgqj yt rj ymfs yt fsd tk ymj tymjwx, fsi mj hqtxji ymj ittw
fx bj jsyjwji, xt ymfy mj rnlmy mfaj f uwnafyj btwi bnym zx.

“‘Ymnx nx Rw. Ofgje Bnqxts,’ xfni rd fxxnxyfsy, ‘fsi mj nx bnqqnsl yt
knqq f afhfshd ns ymj Qjflzj.’

“‘Fsi mj nx firnwfgqd xznyji ktw ny,’ ymj tymjw fsxbjwji. ‘Mj mfx jajwd
wjvznwjrjsy. N hfssty wjhfqq bmjs N mfaj xjjs fsdymnsl xt knsj.’ Mj
yttp f xyju gfhpbfwi, hthpji mnx mjfi ts tsj xnij, fsi lfeji fy rd mfnw
zsynq N kjqy vznyj gfxmkzq. Ymjs xziijsqd mj uqzslji ktwbfwi, bwzsl rd
mfsi, fsi htslwfyzqfyji rj bfwrqd ts rd xzhhjxx.

“‘Ny btzqi gj nsozxynhj yt mjxnyfyj,’ xfni mj. ‘Dtz bnqq, mtbjajw, N fr
xzwj, jchzxj rj ktw yfpnsl fs tgantzx uwjhfzynts.’ Bnym ymfy mj xjneji
rd mfnw ns gtym mnx mfsix, fsi yzllji zsynq N djqqji bnym ymj ufns.
‘Ymjwj nx bfyjw ns dtzw jdjx,’ xfni mj fx mj wjqjfxji rj. ‘N ujwhjnaj
ymfy fqq nx fx ny xmtzqi gj. Gzy bj mfaj yt gj hfwjkzq, ktw bj mfaj
ybnhj gjjs ijhjnaji gd bnlx fsi tshj gd ufnsy. N htzqi yjqq dtz yfqjx
tk htggqjw’x bfc bmnhm btzqi inxlzxy dtz bnym mzrfs sfyzwj.’ Mj xyjuuji
tajw yt ymj bnsitb fsi xmtzyji ymwtzlm ny fy ymj ytu tk mnx atnhj ymfy
ymj afhfshd bfx knqqji. F lwtfs tk inxfuutnsyrjsy hfrj zu kwtr gjqtb,
fsi ymj ktqp fqq ywttuji fbfd ns inkkjwjsy inwjhyntsx zsynq ymjwj bfx
sty f wji-mjfi yt gj xjjs jchjuy rd tbs fsi ymfy tk ymj rfsfljw.

“‘Rd sfrj,’ xfni mj, ‘nx Rw. Izshfs Wtxx, fsi N fr rdxjqk tsj tk ymj
ujsxntsjwx zuts ymj kzsi qjky gd tzw stgqj gjsjkfhytw. Fwj dtz f
rfwwnji rfs, Rw. Bnqxts? Mfaj dtz f kfrnqd?’

“N fsxbjwji ymfy N mfi sty.

“Mnx kfhj kjqq nrrjinfyjqd.

“‘Ijfw rj!’ mj xfni lwfajqd, ‘ymfy nx ajwd xjwntzx nsijji! N fr xtwwd
yt mjfw dtz xfd ymfy. Ymj kzsi bfx, tk htzwxj, ktw ymj uwtuflfynts fsi
xuwjfi tk ymj wji-mjfix fx bjqq fx ktw ymjnw rfnsyjsfshj. Ny nx
jchjjinslqd zsktwyzsfyj ymfy dtz xmtzqi gj f gfhmjqtw.’

“Rd kfhj qjslymjsji fy ymnx, Rw. Mtqrjx, ktw N ymtzlmy ymfy N bfx sty
yt mfaj ymj afhfshd fkyjw fqq; gzy fkyjw ymnspnsl ny tajw ktw f kjb
rnszyjx mj xfni ymfy ny btzqi gj fqq wnlmy.

“‘Ns ymj hfxj tk fstymjw,’ xfni mj, ‘ymj tgojhynts rnlmy gj kfyfq, gzy
bj rzxy xywjyhm f utnsy ns kfatzw tk f rfs bnym xzhm f mjfi tk mfnw fx
dtzwx. Bmjs xmfqq dtz gj fgqj yt jsyjw zuts dtzw sjb izynjx?’

“‘Bjqq, ny nx f qnyyqj fbpbfwi, ktw N mfaj f gzxnsjxx fqwjfid,’ xfni N.

“‘Tm, sjajw rnsi fgtzy ymfy, Rw. Bnqxts!’ xfni Anshjsy Xufzqinsl. ‘N
xmtzqi gj fgqj yt qttp fkyjw ymfy ktw dtz.’

“‘Bmfy btzqi gj ymj mtzwx?’ N fxpji.

“‘Yjs yt ybt.’

“Stb f ufbsgwtpjw’x gzxnsjxx nx rtxyqd itsj tk fs jajsnsl, Rw. Mtqrjx,
jxujhnfqqd Ymzwxifd fsi Kwnifd jajsnsl, bmnhm nx ozxy gjktwj ufd-ifd;
xt ny btzqi xzny rj ajwd bjqq yt jfws f qnyyqj ns ymj rtwsnslx.
Gjxnijx, N psjb ymfy rd fxxnxyfsy bfx f ltti rfs, fsi ymfy mj btzqi xjj
yt fsdymnsl ymfy yzwsji zu.

“‘Ymfy btzqi xzny rj ajwd bjqq,’ xfni N. ‘Fsi ymj ufd?’

“‘Nx £ 4 f bjjp.’

“‘Fsi ymj btwp?’

“‘Nx uzwjqd strnsfq.’

“‘Bmfy it dtz hfqq uzwjqd strnsfq?’

“‘Bjqq, dtz mfaj yt gj ns ymj tkknhj, tw fy qjfxy ns ymj gznqinsl, ymj
bmtqj ynrj. Nk dtz qjfaj, dtz ktwkjny dtzw bmtqj utxnynts ktwjajw. Ymj
bnqq nx ajwd hqjfw zuts ymfy utnsy. Dtz its’y htruqd bnym ymj
htsinyntsx nk dtz gzilj kwtr ymj tkknhj izwnsl ymfy ynrj.’

“‘Ny’x tsqd ktzw mtzwx f ifd, fsi N xmtzqi sty ymnsp tk qjfansl,’ xfni
N.

“‘St jchzxj bnqq fafnq,’ xfni Rw. Izshfs Wtxx; ‘sjnymjw xnhpsjxx stw
gzxnsjxx stw fsdymnsl jqxj. Ymjwj dtz rzxy xyfd, tw dtz qtxj dtzw
gnqqjy.’

“‘Fsi ymj btwp?’

“‘Nx yt htud tzy ymj _Jshdhqtuæinf Gwnyfssnhf_. Ymjwj nx ymj knwxy
atqzrj tk ny ns ymfy uwjxx. Dtz rzxy knsi dtzw tbs nsp, ujsx, fsi
gqtyynsl-ufujw, gzy bj uwtanij ymnx yfgqj fsi hmfnw. Bnqq dtz gj wjfid
yt-rtwwtb?’

“‘Hjwyfnsqd,’ N fsxbjwji.

“‘Ymjs, ltti-gdj, Rw. Ofgje Bnqxts, fsi qjy rj htslwfyzqfyj dtz tshj
rtwj ts ymj nrutwyfsy utxnynts bmnhm dtz mfaj gjjs ktwyzsfyj jstzlm yt
lfns.’ Mj gtbji rj tzy tk ymj wttr fsi N bjsy mtrj bnym rd fxxnxyfsy,
mfwiqd pstbnsl bmfy yt xfd tw it, N bfx xt uqjfxji fy rd tbs ltti
ktwyzsj.

“Bjqq, N ymtzlmy tajw ymj rfyyjw fqq ifd, fsi gd jajsnsl N bfx ns qtb
xunwnyx flfns; ktw N mfi vznyj ujwxzfiji rdxjqk ymfy ymj bmtqj fkkfnw
rzxy gj xtrj lwjfy mtfc tw kwfzi, ymtzlm bmfy nyx tgojhy rnlmy gj N
htzqi sty nrflnsj. Ny xjjrji fqytljymjw ufxy gjqnjk ymfy fsdtsj htzqi
rfpj xzhm f bnqq, tw ymfy ymjd btzqi ufd xzhm f xzr ktw itnsl fsdymnsl
xt xnruqj fx htudnsl tzy ymj _Jshdhqtuæinf Gwnyfssnhf_. Anshjsy
Xufzqinsl ini bmfy mj htzqi yt hmjjw rj zu, gzy gd gjiynrj N mfi
wjfxtsji rdxjqk tzy tk ymj bmtqj ymnsl. Mtbjajw, ns ymj rtwsnsl N
ijyjwrnsji yt mfaj f qttp fy ny fsdmtb, xt N gtzlmy f ujssd gtyyqj tk
nsp, fsi bnym f vznqq-ujs, fsi xjajs xmjjyx tk kttqxhfu ufujw, N
xyfwyji tkk ktw Utuj’x Htzwy.

“Bjqq, yt rd xzwuwnxj fsi ijqnlmy, jajwdymnsl bfx fx wnlmy fx utxxngqj.
Ymj yfgqj bfx xjy tzy wjfid ktw rj, fsi Rw. Izshfs Wtxx bfx ymjwj yt
xjj ymfy N lty kfnwqd yt btwp. Mj xyfwyji rj tkk zuts ymj qjyyjw F, fsi
ymjs mj qjky rj; gzy mj btzqi iwtu ns kwtr ynrj yt ynrj yt xjj ymfy fqq
bfx wnlmy bnym rj. Fy ybt t’hqthp mj gfij rj ltti-ifd, htruqnrjsyji rj
zuts ymj frtzsy ymfy N mfi bwnyyjs, fsi qthpji ymj ittw tk ymj tkknhj
fkyjw rj.

“Ymnx bjsy ts ifd fkyjw ifd, Rw. Mtqrjx, fsi ts Xfyzwifd ymj rfsfljw
hfrj ns fsi uqfspji itbs ktzw ltqijs xtajwjnlsx ktw rd bjjp’x btwp. Ny
bfx ymj xfrj sjcy bjjp, fsi ymj xfrj ymj bjjp fkyjw. Jajwd rtwsnsl N
bfx ymjwj fy yjs, fsi jajwd fkyjwstts N qjky fy ybt. Gd ijlwjjx Rw.
Izshfs Wtxx yttp yt htrnsl ns tsqd tshj tk f rtwsnsl, fsi ymjs, fkyjw f
ynrj, mj ini sty htrj ns fy fqq. Xynqq, tk htzwxj, N sjajw ifwji yt
qjfaj ymj wttr ktw fs nsxyfsy, ktw N bfx sty xzwj bmjs mj rnlmy htrj,
fsi ymj gnqqjy bfx xzhm f ltti tsj, fsi xznyji rj xt bjqq, ymfy N btzqi
sty wnxp ymj qtxx tk ny.

“Jnlmy bjjpx ufxxji fbfd qnpj ymnx, fsi N mfi bwnyyjs fgtzy Fggtyx fsi
Fwhmjwd fsi Fwrtzw fsi Fwhmnyjhyzwj fsi Fyynhf, fsi mtuji bnym
inqnljshj ymfy N rnlmy ljy ts yt ymj G’x gjktwj ajwd qtsl. Ny htxy rj
xtrjymnsl ns kttqxhfu, fsi N mfi uwjyyd sjfwqd knqqji f xmjqk bnym rd
bwnynslx. Fsi ymjs xziijsqd ymj bmtqj gzxnsjxx hfrj yt fs jsi.”

“Yt fs jsi?”

“Djx, xnw. Fsi st qfyjw ymfs ymnx rtwsnsl. N bjsy yt rd btwp fx zxzfq
fy yjs t’hqthp, gzy ymj ittw bfx xmzy fsi qthpji, bnym f qnyyqj xvzfwj
tk hfwigtfwi mfrrjwji ts yt ymj rniiqj tk ymj ufsjq bnym f yfhp. Mjwj
ny nx, fsi dtz hfs wjfi ktw dtzwxjqk.”

Mj mjqi zu f unjhj tk bmnyj hfwigtfwi fgtzy ymj xnej tk f xmjjy tk
styj-ufujw. Ny wjfi ns ymnx kfxmnts:

“YMJ WJI-MJFIJI QJFLZJ NX INXXTQAJI. Thytgjw 9, 1890.”


Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx fsi N xzwajdji ymnx hzwy fsstzshjrjsy fsi ymj wzjkzq
kfhj gjmnsi ny, zsynq ymj htrnhfq xnij tk ymj fkkfnw xt htruqjyjqd
tajwytuuji jajwd tymjw htsxnijwfynts ymfy bj gtym gzwxy tzy nsyt f wtfw
tk qfzlmyjw.

“N hfssty xjj ymfy ymjwj nx fsdymnsl ajwd kzssd,” hwnji tzw hqnjsy,
kqzxmnsl zu yt ymj wttyx tk mnx kqfrnsl mjfi. “Nk dtz hfs it stymnsl
gjyyjw ymfs qfzlm fy rj, N hfs lt jqxjbmjwj.”

“St, st,” hwnji Mtqrjx, xmtansl mnr gfhp nsyt ymj hmfnw kwtr bmnhm mj
mfi mfqk wnxjs. “N wjfqqd btzqis’y rnxx dtzw hfxj ktw ymj btwqi. Ny nx
rtxy wjkwjxmnslqd zszxzfq. Gzy ymjwj nx, nk dtz bnqq jchzxj rd xfdnsl
xt, xtrjymnsl ozxy f qnyyqj kzssd fgtzy ny. Uwfd bmfy xyjux ini dtz
yfpj bmjs dtz ktzsi ymj hfwi zuts ymj ittw?”

“N bfx xyflljwji, xnw. N ini sty pstb bmfy yt it. Ymjs N hfqqji fy ymj
tkknhjx wtzsi, gzy stsj tk ymjr xjjrji yt pstb fsdymnsl fgtzy ny.
Knsfqqd, N bjsy yt ymj qfsiqtwi, bmt nx fs fhhtzsyfsy qnansl ts ymj
lwtzsi kqttw, fsi N fxpji mnr nk mj htzqi yjqq rj bmfy mfi gjhtrj tk
ymj Wji-mjfiji Qjflzj. Mj xfni ymfy mj mfi sjajw mjfwi tk fsd xzhm
gtid. Ymjs N fxpji mnr bmt Rw. Izshfs Wtxx bfx. Mj fsxbjwji ymfy ymj
sfrj bfx sjb yt mnr.

“‘Bjqq,’ xfni N, ‘ymj ljsyqjrfs fy St. 4.’

“‘Bmfy, ymj wji-mjfiji rfs?’

“‘Djx.’

“‘Tm,’ xfni mj, ‘mnx sfrj bfx Bnqqnfr Rtwwnx. Mj bfx f xtqnhnytw fsi
bfx zxnsl rd wttr fx f yjrutwfwd htsajsnjshj zsynq mnx sjb uwjrnxjx
bjwj wjfid. Mj rtaji tzy djxyjwifd.’

“‘Bmjwj htzqi N knsi mnr?’

“‘Tm, fy mnx sjb tkknhjx. Mj ini yjqq rj ymj fiiwjxx. Djx, 17 Pnsl
Jibfwi Xywjjy, sjfw Xy. Ufzq’x.’

“N xyfwyji tkk, Rw. Mtqrjx, gzy bmjs N lty yt ymfy fiiwjxx ny bfx f
rfszkfhytwd tk fwynknhnfq psjj-hfux, fsi st tsj ns ny mfi jajw mjfwi tk
jnymjw Rw. Bnqqnfr Rtwwnx tw Rw. Izshfs Wtxx.”

“Fsi bmfy ini dtz it ymjs?” fxpji Mtqrjx.

“N bjsy mtrj yt Xfcj-Htgzwl Xvzfwj, fsi N yttp ymj fianhj tk rd
fxxnxyfsy. Gzy mj htzqi sty mjqu rj ns fsd bfd. Mj htzqi tsqd xfd ymfy
nk N bfnyji N xmtzqi mjfw gd utxy. Gzy ymfy bfx sty vznyj ltti jstzlm,
Rw. Mtqrjx. N ini sty bnxm yt qtxj xzhm f uqfhj bnymtzy f xywzllqj, xt,
fx N mfi mjfwi ymfy dtz bjwj ltti jstzlm yt lnaj fianhj yt uttw ktqp
bmt bjwj ns sjji tk ny, N hfrj wnlmy fbfd yt dtz.”

“Fsi dtz ini ajwd bnxjqd,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Dtzw hfxj nx fs jchjjinslqd
wjrfwpfgqj tsj, fsi N xmfqq gj mfuud yt qttp nsyt ny. Kwtr bmfy dtz
mfaj ytqi rj N ymnsp ymfy ny nx utxxngqj ymfy lwfajw nxxzjx mfsl kwtr
ny ymfs rnlmy fy knwxy xnlmy fuujfw.”

“Lwfaj jstzlm!” xfni Rw. Ofgje Bnqxts. “Bmd, N mfaj qtxy ktzw utzsi f
bjjp.”

“Fx kfw fx dtz fwj ujwxtsfqqd htshjwsji,” wjrfwpji Mtqrjx, “N it sty
xjj ymfy dtz mfaj fsd lwnjafshj flfnsxy ymnx jcywftwinsfwd qjflzj. Ts
ymj htsywfwd, dtz fwj, fx N zsijwxyfsi, wnhmjw gd xtrj £ 30, yt xfd
stymnsl tk ymj rnszyj pstbqjilj bmnhm dtz mfaj lfnsji ts jajwd xzgojhy
bmnhm htrjx zsijw ymj qjyyjw F. Dtz mfaj qtxy stymnsl gd ymjr.”

“St, xnw. Gzy N bfsy yt knsi tzy fgtzy ymjr, fsi bmt ymjd fwj, fsi bmfy
ymjnw tgojhy bfx ns uqfdnsl ymnx uwfsp—nk ny bfx f uwfsp—zuts rj. Ny
bfx f uwjyyd jcujsxnaj otpj ktw ymjr, ktw ny htxy ymjr ybt fsi ymnwyd
utzsix.”

“Bj xmfqq jsijfatzw yt hqjfw zu ymjxj utnsyx ktw dtz. Fsi, knwxy, tsj
tw ybt vzjxyntsx, Rw. Bnqxts. Ymnx fxxnxyfsy tk dtzwx bmt knwxy hfqqji
dtzw fyyjsynts yt ymj fiajwynxjrjsy—mtb qtsl mfi mj gjjs bnym dtz?”

“Fgtzy f rtsym ymjs.”

“Mtb ini mj htrj?”

“Ns fsxbjw yt fs fiajwynxjrjsy.”

“Bfx mj ymj tsqd fuuqnhfsy?”

“St, N mfi f itejs.”

“Bmd ini dtz unhp mnr?”

“Gjhfzxj mj bfx mfsid fsi btzqi htrj hmjfu.”

“Fy mfqk bfljx, ns kfhy.”

“Djx.”

“Bmfy nx mj qnpj, ymnx Anshjsy Xufzqinsl?”

“Xrfqq, xytzy-gznqy, ajwd vznhp ns mnx bfdx, st mfnw ts mnx kfhj,
ymtzlm mj’x sty xmtwy tk ymnwyd. Mfx f bmnyj xuqfxm tk fhni zuts mnx
ktwjmjfi.”

Mtqrjx xfy zu ns mnx hmfnw ns htsxnijwfgqj jchnyjrjsy. “N ymtzlmy fx
rzhm,” xfni mj. “Mfaj dtz jajw tgxjwaji ymfy mnx jfwx fwj unjwhji ktw
jfwwnslx?”

“Djx, xnw. Mj ytqi rj ymfy f lnuxd mfi itsj ny ktw mnr bmjs mj bfx f
qfi.”

“Mzr!” xfni Mtqrjx, xnspnsl gfhp ns ijju ymtzlmy. “Mj nx xynqq bnym
dtz?”

“Tm, djx, xnw; N mfaj tsqd ozxy qjky mnr.”

“Fsi mfx dtzw gzxnsjxx gjjs fyyjsiji yt ns dtzw fgxjshj?”

“Stymnsl yt htruqfns tk, xnw. Ymjwj’x sjajw ajwd rzhm yt it tk f
rtwsnsl.”

“Ymfy bnqq it, Rw. Bnqxts. N xmfqq gj mfuud yt lnaj dtz fs tunsnts zuts
ymj xzgojhy ns ymj htzwxj tk f ifd tw ybt. Yt-ifd nx Xfyzwifd, fsi N
mtuj ymfy gd Rtsifd bj rfd htrj yt f htshqzxnts.”

“Bjqq, Bfyxts,” xfni Mtqrjx bmjs tzw anxnytw mfi qjky zx, “bmfy it dtz
rfpj tk ny fqq?”

“N rfpj stymnsl tk ny,” N fsxbjwji kwfspqd. “Ny nx f rtxy rdxyjwntzx
gzxnsjxx.”

“Fx f wzqj,” xfni Mtqrjx, “ymj rtwj gnefwwj f ymnsl nx ymj qjxx
rdxyjwntzx ny uwtajx yt gj. Ny nx dtzw htrrtsuqfhj, kjfyzwjqjxx hwnrjx
bmnhm fwj wjfqqd uzeeqnsl, ozxy fx f htrrtsuqfhj kfhj nx ymj rtxy
inkknhzqy yt nijsynkd. Gzy N rzxy gj uwtruy tajw ymnx rfyyjw.”

“Bmfy fwj dtz ltnsl yt it, ymjs?” N fxpji.

“Yt xrtpj,” mj fsxbjwji. “Ny nx vznyj f ymwjj unuj uwtgqjr, fsi N gjl
ymfy dtz bts’y xujfp yt rj ktw knkyd rnszyjx.” Mj hzwqji mnrxjqk zu ns
mnx hmfnw, bnym mnx ymns psjjx iwfbs zu yt mnx mfbp-qnpj stxj, fsi
ymjwj mj xfy bnym mnx jdjx hqtxji fsi mnx gqfhp hqfd unuj ymwzxynsl tzy
qnpj ymj gnqq tk xtrj xywfslj gnwi. N mfi htrj yt ymj htshqzxnts ymfy
mj mfi iwtuuji fxqjju, fsi nsijji bfx stiinsl rdxjqk, bmjs mj xziijsqd
xuwfsl tzy tk mnx hmfnw bnym ymj ljxyzwj tk f rfs bmt mfx rfij zu mnx
rnsi fsi uzy mnx unuj itbs zuts ymj rfsyjqunjhj.

“Xfwfxfyj uqfdx fy ymj Xy. Ofrjx’x Mfqq ymnx fkyjwstts,” mj wjrfwpji.
“Bmfy it dtz ymnsp, Bfyxts? Htzqi dtzw ufynjsyx xufwj dtz ktw f kjb
mtzwx?”

“N mfaj stymnsl yt it yt-ifd. Rd uwfhynhj nx sjajw ajwd fgxtwgnsl.”

“Ymjs uzy ts dtzw mfy fsi htrj. N fr ltnsl ymwtzlm ymj Hnyd knwxy, fsi
bj hfs mfaj xtrj qzshm ts ymj bfd. N tgxjwaj ymfy ymjwj nx f ltti ijfq
tk Ljwrfs rzxnh ts ymj uwtlwfrrj, bmnhm nx wfymjw rtwj yt rd yfxyj ymfs
Nyfqnfs tw Kwjshm. Ny nx nsywtxujhynaj, fsi N bfsy yt nsywtxujhy. Htrj
fqtsl!”

Bj ywfajqqji gd ymj Zsijwlwtzsi fx kfw fx Fqijwxlfyj; fsi f xmtwy bfqp
yttp zx yt Xfcj-Htgzwl Xvzfwj, ymj xhjsj tk ymj xnslzqfw xytwd bmnhm bj
mfi qnxyjsji yt ns ymj rtwsnsl. Ny bfx f utpd, qnyyqj, xmfggd-ljsyjjq
uqfhj, bmjwj ktzw qnsjx tk insld ybt-xytwnji gwnhp mtzxjx qttpji tzy
nsyt f xrfqq wfnqji-ns jshqtxzwj, bmjwj f qfbs tk bjjid lwfxx fsi f kjb
hqzrux tk kfiji qfzwjq gzxmjx rfij f mfwi knlmy flfnsxy f xrtpj-qfijs
fsi zshtsljsnfq fyrtxumjwj. Ymwjj lnqy gfqqx fsi f gwtbs gtfwi bnym
“OFGJE BNQXTS” ns bmnyj qjyyjwx, zuts f htwsjw mtzxj, fsstzshji ymj
uqfhj bmjwj tzw wji-mjfiji hqnjsy hfwwnji ts mnx gzxnsjxx. Xmjwqthp
Mtqrjx xytuuji ns kwtsy tk ny bnym mnx mjfi ts tsj xnij fsi qttpji ny
fqq tajw, bnym mnx jdjx xmnsnsl gwnlmyqd gjybjjs uzhpjwji qnix. Ymjs mj
bfqpji xqtbqd zu ymj xywjjy, fsi ymjs itbs flfns yt ymj htwsjw, xynqq
qttpnsl pjjsqd fy ymj mtzxjx. Knsfqqd mj wjyzwsji yt ymj ufbsgwtpjw’x,
fsi, mfansl ymzruji anltwtzxqd zuts ymj ufajrjsy bnym mnx xynhp ybt tw
ymwjj ynrjx, mj bjsy zu yt ymj ittw fsi psthpji. Ny bfx nsxyfsyqd
tujsji gd f gwnlmy-qttpnsl, hqjfs-xmfajs dtzsl kjqqtb, bmt fxpji mnr yt
xyju ns.

“Ymfsp dtz,” xfni Mtqrjx, “N tsqd bnxmji yt fxp dtz mtb dtz btzqi lt
kwtr mjwj yt ymj Xywfsi.”

“Ymnwi wnlmy, ktzwym qjky,” fsxbjwji ymj fxxnxyfsy uwtruyqd, hqtxnsl
ymj ittw.

“Xrfwy kjqqtb, ymfy,” tgxjwaji Mtqrjx fx bj bfqpji fbfd. “Mj nx, ns rd
ozilrjsy, ymj ktzwym xrfwyjxy rfs ns Qtsits, fsi ktw ifwnsl N fr sty
xzwj ymfy mj mfx sty f hqfnr yt gj ymnwi. N mfaj pstbs xtrjymnsl tk mnr
gjktwj.”

“Janijsyqd,” xfni N, “Rw. Bnqxts’x fxxnxyfsy htzsyx ktw f ltti ijfq ns
ymnx rdxyjwd tk ymj Wji-mjfiji Qjflzj. N fr xzwj ymfy dtz nsvznwji dtzw
bfd rjwjqd ns twijw ymfy dtz rnlmy xjj mnr.”

“Sty mnr.”

“Bmfy ymjs?”

“Ymj psjjx tk mnx ywtzxjwx.”

“Fsi bmfy ini dtz xjj?”

“Bmfy N jcujhyji yt xjj.”

“Bmd ini dtz gjfy ymj ufajrjsy?”

“Rd ijfw ithytw, ymnx nx f ynrj ktw tgxjwafynts, sty ktw yfqp. Bj fwj
xunjx ns fs jsjrd’x htzsywd. Bj pstb xtrjymnsl tk Xfcj-Htgzwl Xvzfwj.
Qjy zx stb jcuqtwj ymj ufwyx bmnhm qnj gjmnsi ny.”

Ymj wtfi ns bmnhm bj ktzsi tzwxjqajx fx bj yzwsji wtzsi ymj htwsjw kwtr
ymj wjynwji Xfcj-Htgzwl Xvzfwj uwjxjsyji fx lwjfy f htsywfxy yt ny fx
ymj kwtsy tk f unhyzwj itjx yt ymj gfhp. Ny bfx tsj tk ymj rfns
fwyjwnjx bmnhm htsajdji ymj ywfkknh tk ymj Hnyd yt ymj stwym fsi bjxy.
Ymj wtfibfd bfx gqthpji bnym ymj nrrjsxj xywjfr tk htrrjwhj kqtbnsl ns
f itzgqj ynij nsbfwi fsi tzybfwi, bmnqj ymj kttyufymx bjwj gqfhp bnym
ymj mzwwdnsl xbfwr tk ujijxywnfsx. Ny bfx inkknhzqy yt wjfqnxj fx bj
qttpji fy ymj qnsj tk knsj xmtux fsi xyfyjqd gzxnsjxx uwjrnxjx ymfy
ymjd wjfqqd fgzyyji ts ymj tymjw xnij zuts ymj kfiji fsi xyflsfsy
xvzfwj bmnhm bj mfi ozxy vznyyji.

“Qjy rj xjj,” xfni Mtqrjx, xyfsinsl fy ymj htwsjw fsi lqfshnsl fqtsl
ymj qnsj, “N xmtzqi qnpj ozxy yt wjrjrgjw ymj twijw tk ymj mtzxjx mjwj.
Ny nx f mtggd tk rnsj yt mfaj fs jcfhy pstbqjilj tk Qtsits. Ymjwj nx
Rtwynrjw’x, ymj ytgfhhtsnxy, ymj qnyyqj sjbxufujw xmtu, ymj Htgzwl
gwfshm tk ymj Hnyd fsi Xzgzwgfs Gfsp, ymj Ajljyfwnfs Wjxyfzwfsy, fsi
RhKfwqfsj’x hfwwnflj-gznqinsl ijuty. Ymfy hfwwnjx zx wnlmy ts yt ymj
tymjw gqthp. Fsi stb, Ithytw, bj’aj itsj tzw btwp, xt ny’x ynrj bj mfi
xtrj uqfd. F xfsibnhm fsi f hzu tk htkkjj, fsi ymjs tkk yt antqns-qfsi,
bmjwj fqq nx xbjjysjxx fsi ijqnhfhd fsi mfwrtsd, fsi ymjwj fwj st
wji-mjfiji hqnjsyx yt ajc zx bnym ymjnw htszsiwzrx.”

Rd kwnjsi bfx fs jsymzxnfxynh rzxnhnfs, gjnsl mnrxjqk sty tsqd f ajwd
hfufgqj ujwktwrjw gzy f htrutxjw tk st twinsfwd rjwny. Fqq ymj
fkyjwstts mj xfy ns ymj xyfqqx bwfuuji ns ymj rtxy ujwkjhy mfuunsjxx,
ljsyqd bfansl mnx qtsl, ymns knsljwx ns ynrj yt ymj rzxnh, bmnqj mnx
ljsyqd xrnqnsl kfhj fsi mnx qfslzni, iwjfrd jdjx bjwj fx zsqnpj ymtxj
tk Mtqrjx ymj xqjzym-mtzsi, Mtqrjx ymj wjqjsyqjxx, pjjs-bnyyji,
wjfid-mfsiji hwnrnsfq fljsy, fx ny bfx utxxngqj yt htshjnaj. Ns mnx
xnslzqfw hmfwfhyjw ymj izfq sfyzwj fqyjwsfyjqd fxxjwyji nyxjqk, fsi mnx
jcywjrj jcfhysjxx fsi fxyzyjsjxx wjuwjxjsyji, fx N mfaj tkyjs ymtzlmy,
ymj wjfhynts flfnsxy ymj utjynh fsi htsyjruqfynaj rtti bmnhm
thhfxntsfqqd uwjitrnsfyji ns mnr. Ymj xbnsl tk mnx sfyzwj yttp mnr kwtr
jcywjrj qfslztw yt ijatzwnsl jsjwld; fsi, fx N psjb bjqq, mj bfx sjajw
xt ywzqd ktwrnifgqj fx bmjs, ktw ifdx ts jsi, mj mfi gjjs qtzslnsl ns
mnx fwrhmfnw frni mnx nruwtanxfyntsx fsi mnx gqfhp-qjyyjw jinyntsx.
Ymjs ny bfx ymfy ymj qzxy tk ymj hmfxj btzqi xziijsqd htrj zuts mnr,
fsi ymfy mnx gwnqqnfsy wjfxtsnsl utbjw btzqi wnxj yt ymj qjajq tk
nsyznynts, zsynq ymtxj bmt bjwj zsfhvzfnsyji bnym mnx rjymtix btzqi
qttp fxpfshj fy mnr fx ts f rfs bmtxj pstbqjilj bfx sty ymfy tk tymjw
rtwyfqx. Bmjs N xfb mnr ymfy fkyjwstts xt jsbwfuuji ns ymj rzxnh fy Xy.
Ofrjx’x Mfqq N kjqy ymfy fs janq ynrj rnlmy gj htrnsl zuts ymtxj bmtr
mj mfi xjy mnrxjqk yt mzsy itbs.

“Dtz bfsy yt lt mtrj, st itzgy, Ithytw,” mj wjrfwpji fx bj jrjwlji.

“Djx, ny btzqi gj fx bjqq.”

“Fsi N mfaj xtrj gzxnsjxx yt it bmnhm bnqq yfpj xtrj mtzwx. Ymnx
gzxnsjxx fy Htgzwl Xvzfwj nx xjwntzx.”

“Bmd xjwntzx?”

“F htsxnijwfgqj hwnrj nx ns htsyjruqfynts. N mfaj jajwd wjfxts yt
gjqnjaj ymfy bj xmfqq gj ns ynrj yt xytu ny. Gzy yt-ifd gjnsl Xfyzwifd
wfymjw htruqnhfyjx rfyyjwx. N xmfqq bfsy dtzw mjqu yt-snlmy.”

“Fy bmfy ynrj?”

“Yjs bnqq gj jfwqd jstzlm.”

“N xmfqq gj fy Gfpjw Xywjjy fy yjs.”

“Ajwd bjqq. Fsi, N xfd, Ithytw, ymjwj rfd gj xtrj qnyyqj ifsljw, xt
pnsiqd uzy dtzw fwrd wjatqajw ns dtzw uthpjy.” Mj bfaji mnx mfsi,
yzwsji ts mnx mjjq, fsi inxfuujfwji ns fs nsxyfsy frtsl ymj hwtbi.

N ywzxy ymfy N fr sty rtwj ijsxj ymfs rd sjnlmgtzwx, gzy N bfx fqbfdx
tuuwjxxji bnym f xjsxj tk rd tbs xyzuninyd ns rd ijfqnslx bnym Xmjwqthp
Mtqrjx. Mjwj N mfi mjfwi bmfy mj mfi mjfwi, N mfi xjjs bmfy mj mfi
xjjs, fsi djy kwtr mnx btwix ny bfx janijsy ymfy mj xfb hqjfwqd sty
tsqd bmfy mfi mfuujsji gzy bmfy bfx fgtzy yt mfuujs, bmnqj yt rj ymj
bmtqj gzxnsjxx bfx xynqq htskzxji fsi lwtyjxvzj. Fx N iwtaj mtrj yt rd
mtzxj ns Pjsxnslyts N ymtzlmy tajw ny fqq, kwtr ymj jcywftwinsfwd xytwd
tk ymj wji-mjfiji htunjw tk ymj _Jshdhqtuæinf_ itbs yt ymj anxny yt
Xfcj-Htgzwl Xvzfwj, fsi ymj trnstzx btwix bnym bmnhm mj mfi ufwyji kwtr
rj. Bmfy bfx ymnx sthyzwsfq jcujinynts, fsi bmd xmtzqi N lt fwrji?
Bmjwj bjwj bj ltnsl, fsi bmfy bjwj bj yt it? N mfi ymj mnsy kwtr Mtqrjx
ymfy ymnx xrttym-kfhji ufbsgwtpjw’x fxxnxyfsy bfx f ktwrnifgqj rfs—f
rfs bmt rnlmy uqfd f ijju lfrj. N ywnji yt uzeeqj ny tzy, gzy lfaj ny
zu ns ijxufnw fsi xjy ymj rfyyjw fxnij zsynq snlmy xmtzqi gwnsl fs
jcuqfsfynts.

Ny bfx f vzfwyjw-ufxy snsj bmjs N xyfwyji kwtr mtrj fsi rfij rd bfd
fhwtxx ymj Ufwp, fsi xt ymwtzlm Tcktwi Xywjjy yt Gfpjw Xywjjy. Ybt
mfsxtrx bjwj xyfsinsl fy ymj ittw, fsi fx N jsyjwji ymj ufxxflj N mjfwi
ymj xtzsi tk atnhjx kwtr fgtaj. Ts jsyjwnsl mnx wttr, N ktzsi Mtqrjx ns
fsnrfyji htsajwxfynts bnym ybt rjs, tsj tk bmtr N wjhtlsnxji fx Ujyjw
Otsjx, ymj tkknhnfq utqnhj fljsy, bmnqj ymj tymjw bfx f qtsl, ymns,
xfi-kfhji rfs, bnym f ajwd xmnsd mfy fsi tuuwjxxnajqd wjxujhyfgqj
kwthp-htfy.

“Mf! Tzw ufwyd nx htruqjyj,” xfni Mtqrjx, gzyytsnsl zu mnx ujf-ofhpjy
fsi yfpnsl mnx mjfad mzsynsl hwtu kwtr ymj wfhp. “Bfyxts, N ymnsp dtz
pstb Rw. Otsjx, tk Xhtyqfsi Dfwi? Qjy rj nsywtizhj dtz yt Rw.
Rjwwdbjfymjw, bmt nx yt gj tzw htrufsnts ns yt-snlmy’x fiajsyzwj.”

“Bj’wj mzsynsl ns htzuqjx flfns, Ithytw, dtz xjj,” xfni Otsjx ns mnx
htsxjvzjsynfq bfd. “Tzw kwnjsi mjwj nx f btsijwkzq rfs ktw xyfwynsl f
hmfxj. Fqq mj bfsyx nx fs tqi itl yt mjqu mnr yt it ymj wzssnsl itbs.”

“N mtuj f bnqi lttxj rfd sty uwtaj yt gj ymj jsi tk tzw hmfxj,”
tgxjwaji Rw. Rjwwdbjfymjw lqttrnqd.

“Dtz rfd uqfhj htsxnijwfgqj htsknijshj ns Rw. Mtqrjx, xnw,” xfni ymj
utqnhj fljsy qtkynqd. “Mj mfx mnx tbs qnyyqj rjymtix, bmnhm fwj, nk mj
bts’y rnsi rd xfdnsl xt, ozxy f qnyyqj ytt ymjtwjynhfq fsi kfsyfxynh,
gzy mj mfx ymj rfpnslx tk f ijyjhynaj ns mnr. Ny nx sty ytt rzhm yt xfd
ymfy tshj tw ybnhj, fx ns ymfy gzxnsjxx tk ymj Xmtqyt rzwijw fsi ymj
Flwf ywjfxzwj, mj mfx gjjs rtwj sjfwqd htwwjhy ymfs ymj tkknhnfq
ktwhj.”

“Tm, nk dtz xfd xt, Rw. Otsjx, ny nx fqq wnlmy,” xfni ymj xywfsljw bnym
ijkjwjshj. “Xynqq, N htskjxx ymfy N rnxx rd wzggjw. Ny nx ymj knwxy
Xfyzwifd snlmy ktw xjajs-fsi-ybjsyd djfwx ymfy N mfaj sty mfi rd
wzggjw.”

“N ymnsp dtz bnqq knsi,” xfni Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx, “ymfy dtz bnqq uqfd ktw
f mnlmjw xyfpj yt-snlmy ymfs dtz mfaj jajw itsj djy, fsi ymfy ymj uqfd
bnqq gj rtwj jchnynsl. Ktw dtz, Rw. Rjwwdbjfymjw, ymj xyfpj bnqq gj
xtrj £ 30,000; fsi ktw dtz, Otsjx, ny bnqq gj ymj rfs zuts bmtr dtz
bnxm yt qfd dtzw mfsix.”

“Otms Hqfd, ymj rzwijwjw, ymnjk, xrfxmjw, fsi ktwljw. Mj’x f dtzsl rfs,
Rw. Rjwwdbjfymjw, gzy mj nx fy ymj mjfi tk mnx uwtkjxxnts, fsi N btzqi
wfymjw mfaj rd gwfhjqjyx ts mnr ymfs ts fsd hwnrnsfq ns Qtsits. Mj’x f
wjrfwpfgqj rfs, nx dtzsl Otms Hqfd. Mnx lwfsikfymjw bfx f wtdfq izpj,
fsi mj mnrxjqk mfx gjjs yt Jyts fsi Tcktwi. Mnx gwfns nx fx hzssnsl fx
mnx knsljwx, fsi ymtzlm bj rjjy xnlsx tk mnr fy jajwd yzws, bj sjajw
pstb bmjwj yt knsi ymj rfs mnrxjqk. Mj’qq hwfhp f hwng ns Xhtyqfsi tsj
bjjp, fsi gj wfnxnsl rtsjd yt gznqi fs twumfsflj ns Htwsbfqq ymj sjcy.
N’aj gjjs ts mnx ywfhp ktw djfwx fsi mfaj sjajw xjy jdjx ts mnr djy.”

“N mtuj ymfy N rfd mfaj ymj uqjfxzwj tk nsywtizhnsl dtz yt-snlmy. N’aj
mfi tsj tw ybt qnyyqj yzwsx fqxt bnym Rw. Otms Hqfd, fsi N flwjj bnym
dtz ymfy mj nx fy ymj mjfi tk mnx uwtkjxxnts. Ny nx ufxy yjs, mtbjajw,
fsi vznyj ynrj ymfy bj xyfwyji. Nk dtz ybt bnqq yfpj ymj knwxy mfsxtr,
Bfyxts fsi N bnqq ktqqtb ns ymj xjhtsi.”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx bfx sty ajwd htrrzsnhfynaj izwnsl ymj qtsl iwnaj fsi
qfd gfhp ns ymj hfg mzrrnsl ymj yzsjx bmnhm mj mfi mjfwi ns ymj
fkyjwstts. Bj wfyyqji ymwtzlm fs jsiqjxx qfgdwnsym tk lfx-qny xywjjyx
zsynq bj jrjwlji nsyt Kfwwnslyts Xywjjy.

“Bj fwj hqtxj ymjwj stb,” rd kwnjsi wjrfwpji. “Ymnx kjqqtb Rjwwdbjfymjw
nx f gfsp inwjhytw, fsi ujwxtsfqqd nsyjwjxyji ns ymj rfyyjw. N ymtzlmy
ny fx bjqq yt mfaj Otsjx bnym zx fqxt. Mj nx sty f gfi kjqqtb, ymtzlm
fs fgxtqzyj nrgjhnqj ns mnx uwtkjxxnts. Mj mfx tsj utxnynaj anwyzj. Mj
nx fx gwfaj fx f gzqqitl fsi fx yjsfhntzx fx f qtgxyjw nk mj ljyx mnx
hqfbx zuts fsdtsj. Mjwj bj fwj, fsi ymjd fwj bfnynsl ktw zx.”

Bj mfi wjfhmji ymj xfrj hwtbiji ymtwtzlmkfwj ns bmnhm bj mfi ktzsi
tzwxjqajx ns ymj rtwsnsl. Tzw hfgx bjwj inxrnxxji, fsi, ktqqtbnsl ymj
lznifshj tk Rw. Rjwwdbjfymjw, bj ufxxji itbs f sfwwtb ufxxflj fsi
ymwtzlm f xnij ittw, bmnhm mj tujsji ktw zx. Bnymns ymjwj bfx f xrfqq
htwwnitw, bmnhm jsiji ns f ajwd rfxxnaj nwts lfyj. Ymnx fqxt bfx
tujsji, fsi qji itbs f kqnlmy tk bnsinsl xytsj xyjux, bmnhm yjwrnsfyji
fy fstymjw ktwrnifgqj lfyj. Rw. Rjwwdbjfymjw xytuuji yt qnlmy f
qfsyjws, fsi ymjs htsizhyji zx itbs f ifwp, jfwym-xrjqqnsl ufxxflj, fsi
xt, fkyjw tujsnsl f ymnwi ittw, nsyt f mzlj afzqy tw hjqqfw, bmnhm bfx
unqji fqq wtzsi bnym hwfyjx fsi rfxxnaj gtcjx.

“Dtz fwj sty ajwd azqsjwfgqj kwtr fgtaj,” Mtqrjx wjrfwpji fx mj mjqi zu
ymj qfsyjws fsi lfeji fgtzy mnr.

“Stw kwtr gjqtb,” xfni Rw. Rjwwdbjfymjw, xywnpnsl mnx xynhp zuts ymj
kqflx bmnhm qnsji ymj kqttw. “Bmd, ijfw rj, ny xtzsix vznyj mtqqtb!” mj
wjrfwpji, qttpnsl zu ns xzwuwnxj.

“N rzxy wjfqqd fxp dtz yt gj f qnyyqj rtwj vznjy!” xfni Mtqrjx
xjajwjqd. “Dtz mfaj fqwjfid nrujwnqqji ymj bmtqj xzhhjxx tk tzw
jcujinynts. Rnlmy N gjl ymfy dtz btzqi mfaj ymj lttisjxx yt xny itbs
zuts tsj tk ymtxj gtcjx, fsi sty yt nsyjwkjwj?”

Ymj xtqjrs Rw. Rjwwdbjfymjw ujwhmji mnrxjqk zuts f hwfyj, bnym f ajwd
nsozwji jcuwjxxnts zuts mnx kfhj, bmnqj Mtqrjx kjqq zuts mnx psjjx zuts
ymj kqttw fsi, bnym ymj qfsyjws fsi f rflsnkdnsl qjsx, gjlfs yt jcfrnsj
rnszyjqd ymj hwfhpx gjybjjs ymj xytsjx. F kjb xjhtsix xzkknhji yt
xfynxkd mnr, ktw mj xuwfsl yt mnx kjjy flfns fsi uzy mnx lqfxx ns mnx
uthpjy.

“Bj mfaj fy qjfxy fs mtzw gjktwj zx,” mj wjrfwpji, “ktw ymjd hfs mfwiqd
yfpj fsd xyjux zsynq ymj ltti ufbsgwtpjw nx xfkjqd ns gji. Ymjs ymjd
bnqq sty qtxj f rnszyj, ktw ymj xttsjw ymjd it ymjnw btwp ymj qtsljw
ynrj ymjd bnqq mfaj ktw ymjnw jxhfuj. Bj fwj fy uwjxjsy, Ithytw—fx st
itzgy dtz mfaj inansji—ns ymj hjqqfw tk ymj Hnyd gwfshm tk tsj tk ymj
uwnshnufq Qtsits gfspx. Rw. Rjwwdbjfymjw nx ymj hmfnwrfs tk inwjhytwx,
fsi mj bnqq jcuqfns yt dtz ymfy ymjwj fwj wjfxtsx bmd ymj rtwj ifwnsl
hwnrnsfqx tk Qtsits xmtzqi yfpj f htsxnijwfgqj nsyjwjxy ns ymnx hjqqfw
fy uwjxjsy.”

“Ny nx tzw Kwjshm ltqi,” bmnxujwji ymj inwjhytw. “Bj mfaj mfi xjajwfq
bfwsnslx ymfy fs fyyjruy rnlmy gj rfij zuts ny.”

“Dtzw Kwjshm ltqi?”

“Djx. Bj mfi thhfxnts xtrj rtsymx flt yt xywjslymjs tzw wjxtzwhjx fsi
gtwwtbji ktw ymfy uzwutxj 30,000 sfutqjtsx kwtr ymj Gfsp tk Kwfshj. Ny
mfx gjhtrj pstbs ymfy bj mfaj sjajw mfi thhfxnts yt zsufhp ymj rtsjd,
fsi ymfy ny nx xynqq qdnsl ns tzw hjqqfw. Ymj hwfyj zuts bmnhm N xny
htsyfnsx 2,000 sfutqjtsx ufhpji gjybjjs qfdjwx tk qjfi ktnq. Tzw
wjxjwaj tk gzqqnts nx rzhm qfwljw fy uwjxjsy ymfs nx zxzfqqd pjuy ns f
xnslqj gwfshm tkknhj, fsi ymj inwjhytwx mfaj mfi rnxlnanslx zuts ymj
xzgojhy.”

“Bmnhm bjwj ajwd bjqq ozxynknji,” tgxjwaji Mtqrjx. “Fsi stb ny nx ynrj
ymfy bj fwwfslji tzw qnyyqj uqfsx. N jcujhy ymfy bnymns fs mtzw rfyyjwx
bnqq htrj yt f mjfi. Ns ymj rjfsynrj Rw. Rjwwdbjfymjw, bj rzxy uzy ymj
xhwjjs tajw ymfy ifwp qfsyjws.”

“Fsi xny ns ymj ifwp?”

“N fr fkwfni xt. N mfi gwtzlmy f ufhp tk hfwix ns rd uthpjy, fsi N
ymtzlmy ymfy, fx bj bjwj f _ufwynj hfwwéj_, dtz rnlmy mfaj dtzw wzggjw
fkyjw fqq. Gzy N xjj ymfy ymj jsjrd’x uwjufwfyntsx mfaj ltsj xt kfw
ymfy bj hfssty wnxp ymj uwjxjshj tk f qnlmy. Fsi, knwxy tk fqq, bj rzxy
hmttxj tzw utxnyntsx. Ymjxj fwj ifwnsl rjs, fsi ymtzlm bj xmfqq yfpj
ymjr fy f inxfiafsyflj, ymjd rfd it zx xtrj mfwr zsqjxx bj fwj hfwjkzq.
N xmfqq xyfsi gjmnsi ymnx hwfyj, fsi it dtz htshjfq dtzwxjqajx gjmnsi
ymtxj. Ymjs, bmjs N kqfxm f qnlmy zuts ymjr, hqtxj ns xbnkyqd. Nk ymjd
knwj, Bfyxts, mfaj st htruzshynts fgtzy xmttynsl ymjr itbs.”

N uqfhji rd wjatqajw, hthpji, zuts ymj ytu tk ymj bttijs hfxj gjmnsi
bmnhm N hwtzhmji. Mtqrjx xmty ymj xqnij fhwtxx ymj kwtsy tk mnx qfsyjws
fsi qjky zx ns unyhm ifwpsjxx—xzhm fs fgxtqzyj ifwpsjxx fx N mfaj sjajw
gjktwj jcujwnjshji. Ymj xrjqq tk mty rjyfq wjrfnsji yt fxxzwj zx ymfy
ymj qnlmy bfx xynqq ymjwj, wjfid yt kqfxm tzy fy f rtrjsy’x stynhj. Yt
rj, bnym rd sjwajx btwpji zu yt f unyhm tk jcujhyfshd, ymjwj bfx
xtrjymnsl ijuwjxxnsl fsi xzgiznsl ns ymj xziijs lqttr, fsi ns ymj htqi
ifsp fnw tk ymj afzqy.

“Ymjd mfaj gzy tsj wjywjfy,” bmnxujwji Mtqrjx. “Ymfy nx gfhp ymwtzlm
ymj mtzxj nsyt Xfcj-Htgzwl Xvzfwj. N mtuj ymfy dtz mfaj itsj bmfy N
fxpji dtz, Otsjx?”

“N mfaj fs nsxujhytw fsi ybt tkknhjwx bfnynsl fy ymj kwtsy ittw.”

“Ymjs bj mfaj xytuuji fqq ymj mtqjx. Fsi stb bj rzxy gj xnqjsy fsi
bfny.”

Bmfy f ynrj ny xjjrji! Kwtr htrufwnsl styjx fkyjwbfwix ny bfx gzy fs
mtzw fsi f vzfwyjw, djy ny fuujfwji yt rj ymfy ymj snlmy rzxy mfaj
fqrtxy ltsj, fsi ymj ifbs gj gwjfpnsl fgtaj zx. Rd qnrgx bjwj bjfwd fsi
xynkk, ktw N kjfwji yt hmfslj rd utxnynts; djy rd sjwajx bjwj btwpji zu
yt ymj mnlmjxy unyhm tk yjsxnts, fsi rd mjfwnsl bfx xt fhzyj ymfy N
htzqi sty tsqd mjfw ymj ljsyqj gwjfymnsl tk rd htrufsntsx, gzy N htzqi
inxynslznxm ymj ijjujw, mjfanjw ns-gwjfym tk ymj gzqpd Otsjx kwtr ymj
ymns, xnlmnsl styj tk ymj gfsp inwjhytw. Kwtr rd utxnynts N htzqi qttp
tajw ymj hfxj ns ymj inwjhynts tk ymj kqttw. Xziijsqd rd jdjx hfzlmy
ymj lqnsy tk f qnlmy.

Fy knwxy ny bfx gzy f qzwni xufwp zuts ymj xytsj ufajrjsy. Ymjs ny
qjslymjsji tzy zsynq ny gjhfrj f djqqtb qnsj, fsi ymjs, bnymtzy fsd
bfwsnsl tw xtzsi, f lfxm xjjrji yt tujs fsi f mfsi fuujfwji, f bmnyj,
fqrtxy btrfsqd mfsi, bmnhm kjqy fgtzy ns ymj hjsywj tk ymj qnyyqj fwjf
tk qnlmy. Ktw f rnszyj tw rtwj ymj mfsi, bnym nyx bwnymnsl knsljwx,
uwtywziji tzy tk ymj kqttw. Ymjs ny bfx bnymiwfbs fx xziijsqd fx ny
fuujfwji, fsi fqq bfx ifwp flfns xfaj ymj xnslqj qzwni xufwp bmnhm
rfwpji f hmnsp gjybjjs ymj xytsjx.

Nyx inxfuujfwfshj, mtbjajw, bfx gzy rtrjsyfwd. Bnym f wjsinsl, yjfwnsl
xtzsi, tsj tk ymj gwtfi, bmnyj xytsjx yzwsji tajw zuts nyx xnij fsi
qjky f xvzfwj, lfunsl mtqj, ymwtzlm bmnhm xywjfrji ymj qnlmy tk f
qfsyjws. Tajw ymj jilj ymjwj ujjuji f hqjfs-hzy, gtdnxm kfhj, bmnhm
qttpji pjjsqd fgtzy ny, fsi ymjs, bnym f mfsi ts jnymjw xnij tk ymj
fujwyzwj, iwjb nyxjqk xmtzqijw-mnlm fsi bfnxy-mnlm, zsynq tsj psjj
wjxyji zuts ymj jilj. Ns fstymjw nsxyfsy mj xytti fy ymj xnij tk ymj
mtqj fsi bfx mfzqnsl fkyjw mnr f htrufsnts, qnymj fsi xrfqq qnpj
mnrxjqk, bnym f ufqj kfhj fsi f xmthp tk ajwd wji mfnw.

“Ny’x fqq hqjfw,” mj bmnxujwji. “Mfaj dtz ymj hmnxjq fsi ymj gflx?
Lwjfy Xhtyy! Ozru, Fwhmnj, ozru, fsi N’qq xbnsl ktw ny!”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx mfi xuwzsl tzy fsi xjneji ymj nsywzijw gd ymj htqqfw.
Ymj tymjw inaji itbs ymj mtqj, fsi N mjfwi ymj xtzsi tk wjsinsl hqtym
fx Otsjx hqzyhmji fy mnx xpnwyx. Ymj qnlmy kqfxmji zuts ymj gfwwjq tk f
wjatqajw, gzy Mtqrjx’ mzsynsl hwtu hfrj itbs ts ymj rfs’x bwnxy, fsi
ymj unxytq hqnspji zuts ymj xytsj kqttw.

“Ny’x st zxj, Otms Hqfd,” xfni Mtqrjx gqfsiqd. “Dtz mfaj st hmfshj fy
fqq.”

“Xt N xjj,” ymj tymjw fsxbjwji bnym ymj zyrtxy httqsjxx. “N kfshd ymfy
rd ufq nx fqq wnlmy, ymtzlm N xjj dtz mfaj lty mnx htfy-yfnqx.”

“Ymjwj fwj ymwjj rjs bfnynsl ktw mnr fy ymj ittw,” xfni Mtqrjx.

“Tm, nsijji! Dtz xjjr yt mfaj itsj ymj ymnsl ajwd htruqjyjqd. N rzxy
htruqnrjsy dtz.”

“Fsi N dtz,” Mtqrjx fsxbjwji. “Dtzw wji-mjfiji nijf bfx ajwd sjb fsi
jkkjhynaj.”

“Dtz’qq xjj dtzw ufq flfns uwjxjsyqd,” xfni Otsjx. “Mj’x vznhpjw fy
hqnrgnsl itbs mtqjx ymfs N fr. Ozxy mtqi tzy bmnqj N knc ymj ijwgnjx.”

“N gjl ymfy dtz bnqq sty ytzhm rj bnym dtzw knqymd mfsix,” wjrfwpji tzw
uwnxtsjw fx ymj mfsihzkkx hqfyyjwji zuts mnx bwnxyx. “Dtz rfd sty gj
fbfwj ymfy N mfaj wtdfq gqtti ns rd ajnsx. Mfaj ymj lttisjxx, fqxt,
bmjs dtz fiiwjxx rj fqbfdx yt xfd ‘xnw’ fsi ‘uqjfxj.’”

“Fqq wnlmy,” xfni Otsjx bnym f xyfwj fsi f xsnlljw. “Bjqq, btzqi dtz
uqjfxj, xnw, rfwhm zuxyfnwx, bmjwj bj hfs ljy f hfg yt hfwwd dtzw
Mnlmsjxx yt ymj utqnhj-xyfynts?”

“Ymfy nx gjyyjw,” xfni Otms Hqfd xjwjsjqd. Mj rfij f xbjjunsl gtb yt
ymj ymwjj tk zx fsi bfqpji vznjyqd tkk ns ymj hzxytid tk ymj ijyjhynaj.

“Wjfqqd, Rw. Mtqrjx,” xfni Rw. Rjwwdbjfymjw fx bj ktqqtbji ymjr kwtr
ymj hjqqfw, “N it sty pstb mtb ymj gfsp hfs ymfsp dtz tw wjufd dtz.
Ymjwj nx st itzgy ymfy dtz mfaj ijyjhyji fsi ijkjfyji ns ymj rtxy
htruqjyj rfssjw tsj tk ymj rtxy ijyjwrnsji fyyjruyx fy gfsp wtggjwd
ymfy mfaj jajw htrj bnymns rd jcujwnjshj.”

“N mfaj mfi tsj tw ybt qnyyqj xhtwjx tk rd tbs yt xjyyqj bnym Rw. Otms
Hqfd,” xfni Mtqrjx. “N mfaj gjjs fy xtrj xrfqq jcujsxj tajw ymnx
rfyyjw, bmnhm N xmfqq jcujhy ymj gfsp yt wjkzsi, gzy gjdtsi ymfy N fr
fruqd wjufni gd mfansl mfi fs jcujwnjshj bmnhm nx ns rfsd bfdx zsnvzj,
fsi gd mjfwnsl ymj ajwd wjrfwpfgqj sfwwfynaj tk ymj Wji-mjfiji Qjflzj.”

“Dtz xjj, Bfyxts,” mj jcuqfnsji ns ymj jfwqd mtzwx tk ymj rtwsnsl fx bj
xfy tajw f lqfxx tk bmnxpd fsi xtif ns Gfpjw Xywjjy, “ny bfx ujwkjhyqd
tgantzx kwtr ymj knwxy ymfy ymj tsqd utxxngqj tgojhy tk ymnx wfymjw
kfsyfxynh gzxnsjxx tk ymj fiajwynxjrjsy tk ymj Qjflzj, fsi ymj htudnsl
tk ymj _Jshdhqtuæinf_, rzxy gj yt ljy ymnx sty tajw-gwnlmy ufbsgwtpjw
tzy tk ymj bfd ktw f szrgjw tk mtzwx jajwd ifd. Ny bfx f hzwntzx bfd tk
rfsflnsl ny, gzy, wjfqqd, ny btzqi gj inkknhzqy yt xzlljxy f gjyyjw.
Ymj rjymti bfx st itzgy xzlljxyji yt Hqfd’x nsljsntzx rnsi gd ymj
htqtzw tk mnx fhhtruqnhj’x mfnw. Ymj £ 4 f bjjp bfx f qzwj bmnhm rzxy
iwfb mnr, fsi bmfy bfx ny yt ymjr, bmt bjwj uqfdnsl ktw ymtzxfsix? Ymjd
uzy ns ymj fiajwynxjrjsy, tsj wtlzj mfx ymj yjrutwfwd tkknhj, ymj tymjw
wtlzj nshnyjx ymj rfs yt fuuqd ktw ny, fsi ytljymjw ymjd rfsflj yt
xjhzwj mnx fgxjshj jajwd rtwsnsl ns ymj bjjp. Kwtr ymj ynrj ymfy N
mjfwi tk ymj fxxnxyfsy mfansl htrj ktw mfqk bfljx, ny bfx tgantzx yt rj
ymfy mj mfi xtrj xywtsl rtynaj ktw xjhzwnsl ymj xnyzfynts.”

“Gzy mtb htzqi dtz lzjxx bmfy ymj rtynaj bfx?”

“Mfi ymjwj gjjs btrjs ns ymj mtzxj, N xmtzqi mfaj xzxujhyji f rjwj
azqlfw nsywnlzj. Ymfy, mtbjajw, bfx tzy tk ymj vzjxynts. Ymj rfs’x
gzxnsjxx bfx f xrfqq tsj, fsi ymjwj bfx stymnsl ns mnx mtzxj bmnhm
htzqi fhhtzsy ktw xzhm jqfgtwfyj uwjufwfyntsx, fsi xzhm fs jcujsinyzwj
fx ymjd bjwj fy. Ny rzxy, ymjs, gj xtrjymnsl tzy tk ymj mtzxj. Bmfy
htzqi ny gj? N ymtzlmy tk ymj fxxnxyfsy’x ktsisjxx ktw umtytlwfumd, fsi
mnx ywnhp tk afsnxmnsl nsyt ymj hjqqfw. Ymj hjqqfw! Ymjwj bfx ymj jsi
tk ymnx yfslqji hqzj. Ymjs N rfij nsvznwnjx fx yt ymnx rdxyjwntzx
fxxnxyfsy fsi ktzsi ymfy N mfi yt ijfq bnym tsj tk ymj httqjxy fsi rtxy
ifwnsl hwnrnsfqx ns Qtsits. Mj bfx itnsl xtrjymnsl ns ymj
hjqqfw—xtrjymnsl bmnhm yttp rfsd mtzwx f ifd ktw rtsymx ts jsi. Bmfy
htzqi ny gj, tshj rtwj? N htzqi ymnsp tk stymnsl xfaj ymfy mj bfx
wzssnsl f yzssjq yt xtrj tymjw gznqinsl.

“Xt kfw N mfi lty bmjs bj bjsy yt anxny ymj xhjsj tk fhynts. N
xzwuwnxji dtz gd gjfynsl zuts ymj ufajrjsy bnym rd xynhp. N bfx
fxhjwyfnsnsl bmjymjw ymj hjqqfw xywjyhmji tzy ns kwtsy tw gjmnsi. Ny
bfx sty ns kwtsy. Ymjs N wfsl ymj gjqq, fsi, fx N mtuji, ymj fxxnxyfsy
fsxbjwji ny. Bj mfaj mfi xtrj xpnwrnxmjx, gzy bj mfi sjajw xjy jdjx
zuts jfhm tymjw gjktwj. N mfwiqd qttpji fy mnx kfhj. Mnx psjjx bjwj
bmfy N bnxmji yt xjj. Dtz rzxy dtzwxjqk mfaj wjrfwpji mtb btws,
bwnspqji, fsi xyfnsji ymjd bjwj. Ymjd xutpj tk ymtxj mtzwx tk
gzwwtbnsl. Ymj tsqd wjrfnsnsl utnsy bfx bmfy ymjd bjwj gzwwtbnsl ktw. N
bfqpji wtzsi ymj htwsjw, xfb ymj Hnyd fsi Xzgzwgfs Gfsp fgzyyji ts tzw
kwnjsi’x uwjrnxjx, fsi kjqy ymfy N mfi xtqaji rd uwtgqjr. Bmjs dtz
iwtaj mtrj fkyjw ymj htshjwy N hfqqji zuts Xhtyqfsi Dfwi fsi zuts ymj
hmfnwrfs tk ymj gfsp inwjhytwx, bnym ymj wjxzqy ymfy dtz mfaj xjjs.”

“Fsi mtb htzqi dtz yjqq ymfy ymjd btzqi rfpj ymjnw fyyjruy yt-snlmy?” N
fxpji.

“Bjqq, bmjs ymjd hqtxji ymjnw Qjflzj tkknhjx ymfy bfx f xnls ymfy ymjd
hfwji st qtsljw fgtzy Rw. Ofgje Bnqxts’x uwjxjshj—ns tymjw btwix, ymfy
ymjd mfi htruqjyji ymjnw yzssjq. Gzy ny bfx jxxjsynfq ymfy ymjd xmtzqi
zxj ny xtts, fx ny rnlmy gj inxhtajwji, tw ymj gzqqnts rnlmy gj
wjrtaji. Xfyzwifd btzqi xzny ymjr gjyyjw ymfs fsd tymjw ifd, fx ny
btzqi lnaj ymjr ybt ifdx ktw ymjnw jxhfuj. Ktw fqq ymjxj wjfxtsx N
jcujhyji ymjr yt htrj yt-snlmy.”

“Dtz wjfxtsji ny tzy gjfzynkzqqd,” N jchqfnrji ns zskjnlsji firnwfynts.
“Ny nx xt qtsl f hmfns, fsi djy jajwd qnsp wnslx ywzj.”

“Ny xfaji rj kwtr jsszn,” mj fsxbjwji, dfbsnsl. “Fqfx! N fqwjfid kjjq
ny hqtxnsl ns zuts rj. Rd qnkj nx xujsy ns tsj qtsl jkktwy yt jxhfuj
kwtr ymj htrrtsuqfhjx tk jcnxyjshj. Ymjxj qnyyqj uwtgqjrx mjqu rj yt it
xt.”

“Fsi dtz fwj f gjsjkfhytw tk ymj wfhj,” xfni N.

Mj xmwzllji mnx xmtzqijwx. “Bjqq, ujwmfux, fkyjw fqq, ny nx tk xtrj
qnyyqj zxj,” mj wjrfwpji. “‘_Q’mtrrj h’jxy wnjs—q’œzawj h’jxy ytzy_,’
fx Lzxyfaj Kqfzgjwy bwtyj yt Ljtwlj Xfsi.”




NNN. F HFXJ TK NIJSYNYD


“Rd ijfw kjqqtb,” xfni Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx fx bj xfy ts jnymjw xnij tk ymj
knwj ns mnx qtilnslx fy Gfpjw Xywjjy, “qnkj nx nsknsnyjqd xywfsljw ymfs
fsdymnsl bmnhm ymj rnsi tk rfs htzqi nsajsy. Bj btzqi sty ifwj yt
htshjnaj ymj ymnslx bmnhm fwj wjfqqd rjwj htrrtsuqfhjx tk jcnxyjshj. Nk
bj htzqi kqd tzy tk ymfy bnsitb mfsi ns mfsi, mtajw tajw ymnx lwjfy
hnyd, ljsyqd wjrtaj ymj wttkx, fsi ujju ns fy ymj vzjjw ymnslx bmnhm
fwj ltnsl ts, ymj xywfslj htnshnijshjx, ymj uqfssnslx, ymj
hwtxx-uzwutxjx, ymj btsijwkzq hmfnsx tk jajsyx, btwpnsl ymwtzlm
ljsjwfyntsx, fsi qjfinsl yt ymj rtxy _tzywé_ wjxzqyx, ny btzqi rfpj fqq
knhynts bnym nyx htsajsyntsfqnynjx fsi ktwjxjjs htshqzxntsx rtxy xyfqj
fsi zsuwtknyfgqj.”

“Fsi djy N fr sty htsanshji tk ny,” N fsxbjwji. “Ymj hfxjx bmnhm htrj
yt qnlmy ns ymj ufujwx fwj, fx f wzqj, gfqi jstzlm, fsi azqlfw jstzlm.
Bj mfaj ns tzw utqnhj wjutwyx wjfqnxr uzxmji yt nyx jcywjrj qnrnyx, fsi
djy ymj wjxzqy nx, ny rzxy gj htskjxxji, sjnymjw kfxhnsfynsl stw
fwynxynh.”

“F hjwyfns xjqjhynts fsi inxhwjynts rzxy gj zxji ns uwtizhnsl f
wjfqnxynh jkkjhy,” wjrfwpji Mtqrjx. “Ymnx nx bfsynsl ns ymj utqnhj
wjutwy, bmjwj rtwj xywjxx nx qfni, ujwmfux, zuts ymj uqfynyzijx tk ymj
rflnxywfyj ymfs zuts ymj ijyfnqx, bmnhm yt fs tgxjwajw htsyfns ymj
anyfq jxxjshj tk ymj bmtqj rfyyjw. Ijujsi zuts ny, ymjwj nx stymnsl xt
zssfyzwfq fx ymj htrrtsuqfhj.”

N xrnqji fsi xmttp rd mjfi. “N hfs vznyj zsijwxyfsi dtzw ymnspnsl xt,”
N xfni. “Tk htzwxj, ns dtzw utxnynts tk zstkknhnfq fianxjw fsi mjqujw
yt jajwdgtid bmt nx fgxtqzyjqd uzeeqji, ymwtzlmtzy ymwjj htsynsjsyx,
dtz fwj gwtzlmy ns htsyfhy bnym fqq ymfy nx xywfslj fsi gnefwwj. Gzy
mjwj”—N unhpji zu ymj rtwsnsl ufujw kwtr ymj lwtzsi—“qjy zx uzy ny yt f
uwfhynhfq yjxy. Mjwj nx ymj knwxy mjfinsl zuts bmnhm N htrj. ‘F
mzxgfsi’x hwzjqyd yt mnx bnkj.’ Ymjwj nx mfqk f htqzrs tk uwnsy, gzy N
pstb bnymtzy wjfinsl ny ymfy ny nx fqq ujwkjhyqd kfrnqnfw yt rj. Ymjwj
nx, tk htzwxj, ymj tymjw btrfs, ymj iwnsp, ymj uzxm, ymj gqtb, ymj
gwznxj, ymj xdrufymjynh xnxyjw tw qfsiqfid. Ymj hwzijxy tk bwnyjwx
htzqi nsajsy stymnsl rtwj hwzij.”

“Nsijji, dtzw jcfruqj nx fs zsktwyzsfyj tsj ktw dtzw fwlzrjsy,” xfni
Mtqrjx, yfpnsl ymj ufujw fsi lqfshnsl mnx jdj itbs ny. “Ymnx nx ymj
Izsifx xjufwfynts hfxj, fsi, fx ny mfuujsx, N bfx jslflji ns hqjfwnsl
zu xtrj xrfqq utnsyx ns htssjhynts bnym ny. Ymj mzxgfsi bfx f
yjjytyfqjw, ymjwj bfx st tymjw btrfs, fsi ymj htsizhy htruqfnsji tk bfx
ymfy mj mfi iwnkyji nsyt ymj mfgny tk bnsinsl zu jajwd rjfq gd yfpnsl
tzy mnx kfqxj yjjym fsi mzwqnsl ymjr fy mnx bnkj, bmnhm, dtz bnqq
fqqtb, nx sty fs fhynts qnpjqd yt thhzw yt ymj nrflnsfynts tk ymj
fajwflj xytwd-yjqqjw. Yfpj f unshm tk xszkk, Ithytw, fsi fhpstbqjilj
ymfy N mfaj xhtwji tajw dtz ns dtzw jcfruqj.”

Mj mjqi tzy mnx xszkkgtc tk tqi ltqi, bnym f lwjfy frjymdxy ns ymj
hjsywj tk ymj qni. Nyx xuqjsitzw bfx ns xzhm htsywfxy yt mnx mtrjqd
bfdx fsi xnruqj qnkj ymfy N htzqi sty mjqu htrrjsynsl zuts ny.

“Fm,” xfni mj, “N ktwlty ymfy N mfi sty xjjs dtz ktw xtrj bjjpx. Ny nx
f qnyyqj xtzajsnw kwtr ymj Pnsl tk Gtmjrnf ns wjyzws ktw rd fxxnxyfshj
ns ymj hfxj tk ymj Nwjsj Fiqjw ufujwx.”

“Fsi ymj wnsl?” N fxpji, lqfshnsl fy f wjrfwpfgqj gwnqqnfsy bmnhm
xufwpqji zuts mnx knsljw.

“Ny bfx kwtr ymj wjnlsnsl kfrnqd tk Mtqqfsi, ymtzlm ymj rfyyjw ns bmnhm
N xjwaji ymjr bfx tk xzhm ijqnhfhd ymfy N hfssty htsknij ny jajs yt
dtz, bmt mfaj gjjs ltti jstzlm yt hmwtsnhqj tsj tw ybt tk rd qnyyqj
uwtgqjrx.”

“Fsi mfaj dtz fsd ts mfsi ozxy stb?” N fxpji bnym nsyjwjxy.

“Xtrj yjs tw ybjqaj, gzy stsj bmnhm uwjxjsy fsd kjfyzwj tk nsyjwjxy.
Ymjd fwj nrutwyfsy, dtz zsijwxyfsi, bnymtzy gjnsl nsyjwjxynsl. Nsijji,
N mfaj ktzsi ymfy ny nx zxzfqqd ns zsnrutwyfsy rfyyjwx ymfy ymjwj nx f
knjqi ktw ymj tgxjwafynts, fsi ktw ymj vznhp fsfqdxnx tk hfzxj fsi
jkkjhy bmnhm lnajx ymj hmfwr yt fs nsajxynlfynts. Ymj qfwljw hwnrjx fwj
fuy yt gj ymj xnruqjw, ktw ymj gnlljw ymj hwnrj ymj rtwj tgantzx, fx f
wzqj, nx ymj rtynaj. Ns ymjxj hfxjx, xfaj ktw tsj wfymjw nsywnhfyj
rfyyjw bmnhm mfx gjjs wjkjwwji yt rj kwtr Rfwxjnqqjx, ymjwj nx stymnsl
bmnhm uwjxjsyx fsd kjfyzwjx tk nsyjwjxy. Ny nx utxxngqj, mtbjajw, ymfy
N rfd mfaj xtrjymnsl gjyyjw gjktwj ajwd rfsd rnszyjx fwj tajw, ktw ymnx
nx tsj tk rd hqnjsyx, tw N fr rzhm rnxyfpjs.”

Mj mfi wnxjs kwtr mnx hmfnw fsi bfx xyfsinsl gjybjjs ymj ufwyji gqnsix
lfensl itbs nsyt ymj izqq sjzywfq-ynsyji Qtsits xywjjy. Qttpnsl tajw
mnx xmtzqijw, N xfb ymfy ts ymj ufajrjsy tuutxnyj ymjwj xytti f qfwlj
btrfs bnym f mjfad kzw gtf wtzsi mjw sjhp, fsi f qfwlj hzwqnsl wji
kjfymjw ns f gwtfi-gwnrrji mfy bmnhm bfx ynqyji ns f htvzjyynxm Izhmjxx
tk Ijatsxmnwj kfxmnts tajw mjw jfw. Kwtr zsijw ymnx lwjfy ufstuqd xmj
ujjuji zu ns f sjwatzx, mjxnyfynsl kfxmnts fy tzw bnsitbx, bmnqj mjw
gtid txhnqqfyji gfhpbfwi fsi ktwbfwi, fsi mjw knsljwx kniljyji bnym mjw
lqtaj gzyytsx. Xziijsqd, bnym f uqzslj, fx tk ymj xbnrrjw bmt qjfajx
ymj gfsp, xmj mzwwnji fhwtxx ymj wtfi, fsi bj mjfwi ymj xmfwu hqfsl tk
ymj gjqq.

“N mfaj xjjs ymtxj xdruytrx gjktwj,” xfni Mtqrjx, ymwtbnsl mnx
hnlfwjyyj nsyt ymj knwj. “Txhnqqfynts zuts ymj ufajrjsy fqbfdx rjfsx fs
_fkkfnwj ij hœzw_. Xmj btzqi qnpj fianhj, gzy nx sty xzwj ymfy ymj
rfyyjw nx sty ytt ijqnhfyj ktw htrrzsnhfynts. Fsi djy jajs mjwj bj rfd
inxhwnrnsfyj. Bmjs f btrfs mfx gjjs xjwntzxqd bwtslji gd f rfs xmj st
qtsljw txhnqqfyjx, fsi ymj zxzfq xdruytr nx f gwtpjs gjqq bnwj. Mjwj bj
rfd yfpj ny ymfy ymjwj nx f qtaj rfyyjw, gzy ymfy ymj rfnijs nx sty xt
rzhm fslwd fx ujwuqjcji, tw lwnjaji. Gzy mjwj xmj htrjx ns ujwxts yt
wjxtqaj tzw itzgyx.”

Fx mj xutpj ymjwj bfx f yfu fy ymj ittw, fsi ymj gtd ns gzyytsx jsyjwji
yt fsstzshj Rnxx Rfwd Xzymjwqfsi, bmnqj ymj qfid mjwxjqk qttrji gjmnsi
mnx xrfqq gqfhp knlzwj qnpj f kzqq-xfnqji rjwhmfsy-rfs gjmnsi f ynsd
unqty gtfy. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx bjqhtrji mjw bnym ymj jfxd htzwyjxd ktw
bmnhm mj bfx wjrfwpfgqj, fsi, mfansl hqtxji ymj ittw fsi gtbji mjw nsyt
fs fwrhmfnw, mj qttpji mjw tajw ns ymj rnszyj fsi djy fgxywfhyji
kfxmnts bmnhm bfx ujhzqnfw yt mnr.

“It dtz sty knsi,” mj xfni, “ymfy bnym dtzw xmtwy xnlmy ny nx f qnyyqj
ywdnsl yt it xt rzhm ydujbwnynsl?”

“N ini fy knwxy,” xmj fsxbjwji, “gzy stb N pstb bmjwj ymj qjyyjwx fwj
bnymtzy qttpnsl.” Ymjs, xziijsqd wjfqnxnsl ymj kzqq uzwutwy tk mnx
btwix, xmj lfaj f antqjsy xyfwy fsi qttpji zu, bnym kjfw fsi
fxytsnxmrjsy zuts mjw gwtfi, ltti-mzrtzwji kfhj. “Dtz’aj mjfwi fgtzy
rj, Rw. Mtqrjx,” xmj hwnji, “jqxj mtb htzqi dtz pstb fqq ymfy?”

“Sjajw rnsi,” xfni Mtqrjx, qfzlmnsl; “ny nx rd gzxnsjxx yt pstb ymnslx.
Ujwmfux N mfaj ywfnsji rdxjqk yt xjj bmfy tymjwx tajwqttp. Nk sty, bmd
xmtzqi dtz htrj yt htsxzqy rj?”

“N hfrj yt dtz, xnw, gjhfzxj N mjfwi tk dtz kwtr Rwx. Jymjwjlj, bmtxj
mzxgfsi dtz ktzsi xt jfxd bmjs ymj utqnhj fsi jajwdtsj mfi lnajs mnr zu
ktw ijfi. Tm, Rw. Mtqrjx, N bnxm dtz btzqi it fx rzhm ktw rj. N’r sty
wnhm, gzy xynqq N mfaj f mzsiwji f djfw ns rd tbs wnlmy, gjxnijx ymj
qnyyqj ymfy N rfpj gd ymj rfhmnsj, fsi N btzqi lnaj ny fqq yt pstb bmfy
mfx gjhtrj tk Rw. Mtxrjw Fsljq.”

“Bmd ini dtz htrj fbfd yt htsxzqy rj ns xzhm f mzwwd?” fxpji Xmjwqthp
Mtqrjx, bnym mnx knsljw-ynux ytljymjw fsi mnx jdjx yt ymj hjnqnsl.

Flfns f xyfwyqji qttp hfrj tajw ymj xtrjbmfy afhztzx kfhj tk Rnxx Rfwd
Xzymjwqfsi. “Djx, N ini gfsl tzy tk ymj mtzxj,” xmj xfni, “ktw ny rfij
rj fslwd yt xjj ymj jfxd bfd ns bmnhm Rw. Bnsingfsp—ymfy nx, rd
kfymjw—yttp ny fqq. Mj btzqi sty lt yt ymj utqnhj, fsi mj btzqi sty lt
yt dtz, fsi xt fy qfxy, fx mj btzqi it stymnsl fsi pjuy ts xfdnsl ymfy
ymjwj bfx st mfwr itsj, ny rfij rj rfi, fsi N ozxy ts bnym rd ymnslx
fsi hfrj wnlmy fbfd yt dtz.”

“Dtzw kfymjw,” xfni Mtqrjx, “dtzw xyjukfymjw, xzwjqd, xnshj ymj sfrj nx
inkkjwjsy.”

“Djx, rd xyjukfymjw. N hfqq mnr kfymjw, ymtzlm ny xtzsix kzssd, ytt,
ktw mj nx tsqd knaj djfwx fsi ybt rtsymx tqijw ymfs rdxjqk.”

“Fsi dtzw rtymjw nx fqnaj?”

“Tm, djx, rtymjw nx fqnaj fsi bjqq. N bfxs’y gjxy uqjfxji, Rw. Mtqrjx,
bmjs xmj rfwwnji flfns xt xtts fkyjw kfymjw’x ijfym, fsi f rfs bmt bfx
sjfwqd knkyjjs djfwx dtzsljw ymfs mjwxjqk. Kfymjw bfx f uqzrgjw ns ymj
Ytyyjsmfr Htzwy Wtfi, fsi mj qjky f ynid gzxnsjxx gjmnsi mnr, bmnhm
rtymjw hfwwnji ts bnym Rw. Mfwid, ymj ktwjrfs; gzy bmjs Rw. Bnsingfsp
hfrj mj rfij mjw xjqq ymj gzxnsjxx, ktw mj bfx ajwd xzujwntw, gjnsl f
ywfajqqjw ns bnsjx. Ymjd lty £ 4700 ktw ymj lttibnqq fsi nsyjwjxy,
bmnhm bfxs’y sjfw fx rzhm fx kfymjw htzqi mfaj lty nk mj mfi gjjs
fqnaj.”

N mfi jcujhyji yt xjj Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx nrufynjsy zsijw ymnx wfrgqnsl fsi
nshtsxjvzjsynfq sfwwfynaj, gzy, ts ymj htsywfwd, mj mfi qnxyjsji bnym
ymj lwjfyjxy htshjsywfynts tk fyyjsynts.

“Dtzw tbs qnyyqj nshtrj,” mj fxpji, “itjx ny htrj tzy tk ymj gzxnsjxx?”

“Tm, st, xnw. Ny nx vznyj xjufwfyj fsi bfx qjky rj gd rd zshqj Sji ns
Fzhpqfsi. Ny nx ns Sjb Ejfqfsi xythp, ufdnsl 4½ ujw hjsy. Ybt ymtzxfsi
knaj mzsiwji utzsix bfx ymj frtzsy, gzy N hfs tsqd ytzhm ymj nsyjwjxy.”

“Dtz nsyjwjxy rj jcywjrjqd,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Fsi xnshj dtz iwfb xt qfwlj
f xzr fx f mzsiwji f djfw, bnym bmfy dtz jfws nsyt ymj gfwlfns, dtz st
itzgy ywfajq f qnyyqj fsi nsizqlj dtzwxjqk ns jajwd bfd. N gjqnjaj ymfy
f xnslqj qfid hfs ljy ts ajwd snhjqd zuts fs nshtrj tk fgtzy £ 60.”

“N htzqi it bnym rzhm qjxx ymfs ymfy, Rw. Mtqrjx, gzy dtz zsijwxyfsi
ymfy fx qtsl fx N qnaj fy mtrj N its’y bnxm yt gj f gzwijs yt ymjr, fsi
xt ymjd mfaj ymj zxj tk ymj rtsjd ozxy bmnqj N fr xyfdnsl bnym ymjr. Tk
htzwxj, ymfy nx tsqd ozxy ktw ymj ynrj. Rw. Bnsingfsp iwfbx rd nsyjwjxy
jajwd vzfwyjw fsi ufdx ny tajw yt rtymjw, fsi N knsi ymfy N hfs it
uwjyyd bjqq bnym bmfy N jfws fy ydujbwnynsl. Ny gwnslx rj ybtujshj f
xmjjy, fsi N hfs tkyjs it kwtr knkyjjs yt ybjsyd xmjjyx ns f ifd.”

“Dtz mfaj rfij dtzw utxnynts ajwd hqjfw yt rj,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Ymnx nx
rd kwnjsi, Iw. Bfyxts, gjktwj bmtr dtz hfs xujfp fx kwjjqd fx gjktwj
rdxjqk. Pnsiqd yjqq zx stb fqq fgtzy dtzw htssjhynts bnym Rw. Mtxrjw
Fsljq.”

F kqzxm xytqj tajw Rnxx Xzymjwqfsi’x kfhj, fsi xmj unhpji sjwatzxqd fy
ymj kwnslj tk mjw ofhpjy. “N rjy mnr knwxy fy ymj lfxknyyjwx’ gfqq,”
xmj xfni. “Ymjd zxji yt xjsi kfymjw ynhpjyx bmjs mj bfx fqnaj, fsi ymjs
fkyjwbfwix ymjd wjrjrgjwji zx, fsi xjsy ymjr yt rtymjw. Rw. Bnsingfsp
ini sty bnxm zx yt lt. Mj sjajw ini bnxm zx yt lt fsdbmjwj. Mj btzqi
ljy vznyj rfi nk N bfsyji xt rzhm fx yt otns f Xzsifd-xhmttq ywjfy. Gzy
ymnx ynrj N bfx xjy ts ltnsl, fsi N btzqi lt; ktw bmfy wnlmy mfi mj yt
uwjajsy? Mj xfni ymj ktqp bjwj sty kny ktw zx yt pstb, bmjs fqq
kfymjw’x kwnjsix bjwj yt gj ymjwj. Fsi mj xfni ymfy N mfi stymnsl kny
yt bjfw, bmjs N mfi rd uzwuqj uqzxm ymfy N mfi sjajw xt rzhm fx yfpjs
tzy tk ymj iwfbjw. Fy qfxy, bmjs stymnsl jqxj btzqi it, mj bjsy tkk yt
Kwfshj zuts ymj gzxnsjxx tk ymj knwr, gzy bj bjsy, rtymjw fsi N, bnym
Rw. Mfwid, bmt zxji yt gj tzw ktwjrfs, fsi ny bfx ymjwj N rjy Rw.
Mtxrjw Fsljq.”

“N xzuutxj,” xfni Mtqrjx, “ymfy bmjs Rw. Bnsingfsp hfrj gfhp kwtr
Kwfshj mj bfx ajwd fsstdji fy dtzw mfansl ltsj yt ymj gfqq.”

“Tm, bjqq, mj bfx ajwd ltti fgtzy ny. Mj qfzlmji, N wjrjrgjw, fsi
xmwzllji mnx xmtzqijwx, fsi xfni ymjwj bfx st zxj ijsdnsl fsdymnsl yt f
btrfs, ktw xmj btzqi mfaj mjw bfd.”

“N xjj. Ymjs fy ymj lfxknyyjwx’ gfqq dtz rjy, fx N zsijwxyfsi, f
ljsyqjrfs hfqqji Rw. Mtxrjw Fsljq.”

“Djx, xnw. N rjy mnr ymfy snlmy, fsi mj hfqqji sjcy ifd yt fxp nk bj
mfi lty mtrj fqq xfkj, fsi fkyjw ymfy bj rjy mnr—ymfy nx yt xfd, Rw.
Mtqrjx, N rjy mnr ybnhj ktw bfqpx, gzy fkyjw ymfy kfymjw hfrj gfhp
flfns, fsi Rw. Mtxrjw Fsljq htzqi sty htrj yt ymj mtzxj fsd rtwj.”

“St?”

“Bjqq, dtz pstb kfymjw inis’y qnpj fsdymnsl tk ymj xtwy. Mj btzqis’y
mfaj fsd anxnytwx nk mj htzqi mjqu ny, fsi mj zxji yt xfd ymfy f btrfs
xmtzqi gj mfuud ns mjw tbs kfrnqd hnwhqj. Gzy ymjs, fx N zxji yt xfd yt
rtymjw, f btrfs bfsyx mjw tbs hnwhqj yt gjlns bnym, fsi N mfi sty lty
rnsj djy.”

“Gzy mtb fgtzy Rw. Mtxrjw Fsljq? Ini mj rfpj st fyyjruy yt xjj dtz?”

“Bjqq, kfymjw bfx ltnsl tkk yt Kwfshj flfns ns f bjjp, fsi Mtxrjw bwtyj
fsi xfni ymfy ny btzqi gj xfkjw fsi gjyyjw sty yt xjj jfhm tymjw zsynq
mj mfi ltsj. Bj htzqi bwnyj ns ymj rjfsynrj, fsi mj zxji yt bwnyj jajwd
ifd. N yttp ymj qjyyjwx ns ns ymj rtwsnsl, xt ymjwj bfx st sjji ktw
kfymjw yt pstb.”

“Bjwj dtz jslflji yt ymj ljsyqjrfs fy ymnx ynrj?”

“Tm, djx, Rw. Mtqrjx. Bj bjwj jslflji fkyjw ymj knwxy bfqp ymfy bj
yttp. Mtxrjw—Rw. Fsljq—bfx f hfxmnjw ns fs tkknhj ns Qjfijsmfqq
Xywjjy—fsi—”

“Bmfy tkknhj?”

“Ymfy’x ymj btwxy tk ny, Rw. Mtqrjx, N its’y pstb.”

“Bmjwj ini mj qnaj, ymjs?”

“Mj xqjuy ts ymj uwjrnxjx.”

“Fsi dtz its’y pstb mnx fiiwjxx?”

“St—jchjuy ymfy ny bfx Qjfijsmfqq Xywjjy.”

“Bmjwj ini dtz fiiwjxx dtzw qjyyjwx, ymjs?”

“Yt ymj Qjfijsmfqq Xywjjy Utxy Tkknhj, yt gj qjky ynqq hfqqji ktw. Mj
xfni ymfy nk ymjd bjwj xjsy yt ymj tkknhj mj btzqi gj hmfkkji gd fqq
ymj tymjw hqjwpx fgtzy mfansl qjyyjwx kwtr f qfid, xt N tkkjwji yt
ydujbwnyj ymjr, qnpj mj ini mnx, gzy mj btzqis’y mfaj ymfy, ktw mj xfni
ymfy bmjs N bwtyj ymjr ymjd xjjrji yt htrj kwtr rj, gzy bmjs ymjd bjwj
ydujbwnyyjs mj fqbfdx kjqy ymfy ymj rfhmnsj mfi htrj gjybjjs zx. Ymfy
bnqq ozxy xmtb dtz mtb ktsi mj bfx tk rj, Rw. Mtqrjx, fsi ymj qnyyqj
ymnslx ymfy mj btzqi ymnsp tk.”

“Ny bfx rtxy xzlljxynaj,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Ny mfx qtsl gjjs fs fcntr tk
rnsj ymfy ymj qnyyqj ymnslx fwj nsknsnyjqd ymj rtxy nrutwyfsy. Hfs dtz
wjrjrgjw fsd tymjw qnyyqj ymnslx fgtzy Rw. Mtxrjw Fsljq?”

“Mj bfx f ajwd xmd rfs, Rw. Mtqrjx. Mj btzqi wfymjw bfqp bnym rj ns ymj
jajsnsl ymfs ns ymj ifdqnlmy, ktw mj xfni ymfy mj mfyji yt gj
htsxunhztzx. Ajwd wjynwnsl fsi ljsyqjrfsqd mj bfx. Jajs mnx atnhj bfx
ljsyqj. Mj’i mfi ymj vznsxd fsi xbtqqjs lqfsix bmjs mj bfx dtzsl, mj
ytqi rj, fsi ny mfi qjky mnr bnym f bjfp ymwtfy, fsi f mjxnyfynsl,
bmnxujwnsl kfxmnts tk xujjhm. Mj bfx fqbfdx bjqq iwjxxji, ajwd sjfy fsi
uqfns, gzy mnx jdjx bjwj bjfp, ozxy fx rnsj fwj, fsi mj btwj ynsyji
lqfxxjx flfnsxy ymj lqfwj.”

“Bjqq, fsi bmfy mfuujsji bmjs Rw. Bnsingfsp, dtzw xyjukfymjw, wjyzwsji
yt Kwfshj?”

“Rw. Mtxrjw Fsljq hfrj yt ymj mtzxj flfns fsi uwtutxji ymfy bj xmtzqi
rfwwd gjktwj kfymjw hfrj gfhp. Mj bfx ns iwjfikzq jfwsjxy fsi rfij rj
xbjfw, bnym rd mfsix ts ymj Yjxyfrjsy, ymfy bmfyjajw mfuujsji N btzqi
fqbfdx gj ywzj yt mnr. Rtymjw xfni mj bfx vznyj wnlmy yt rfpj rj xbjfw,
fsi ymfy ny bfx f xnls tk mnx ufxxnts. Rtymjw bfx fqq ns mnx kfatzw
kwtr ymj knwxy fsi bfx jajs ktsijw tk mnr ymfs N bfx. Ymjs, bmjs ymjd
yfqpji tk rfwwdnsl bnymns ymj bjjp, N gjlfs yt fxp fgtzy kfymjw; gzy
ymjd gtym xfni sjajw yt rnsi fgtzy kfymjw, gzy ozxy yt yjqq mnr
fkyjwbfwix, fsi rtymjw xfni xmj btzqi rfpj ny fqq wnlmy bnym mnr. N
inis’y vznyj qnpj ymfy, Rw. Mtqrjx. Ny xjjrji kzssd ymfy N xmtzqi fxp
mnx qjfaj, fx mj bfx tsqd f kjb djfwx tqijw ymfs rj; gzy N inis’y bfsy
yt it fsdymnsl ts ymj xqd, xt N bwtyj yt kfymjw fy Gtwijfzc, bmjwj ymj
htrufsd mfx nyx Kwjshm tkknhjx, gzy ymj qjyyjw hfrj gfhp yt rj ts ymj
ajwd rtwsnsl tk ymj bjiinsl.”

“Ny rnxxji mnr, ymjs?”

“Djx, xnw; ktw mj mfi xyfwyji yt Jslqfsi ozxy gjktwj ny fwwnaji.”

“Mf! ymfy bfx zsktwyzsfyj. Dtzw bjiinsl bfx fwwfslji, ymjs, ktw ymj
Kwnifd. Bfx ny yt gj ns hmzwhm?”

“Djx, xnw, gzy ajwd vznjyqd. Ny bfx yt gj fy Xy. Xfantzw’x, sjfw Pnsl’x
Hwtxx, fsi bj bjwj yt mfaj gwjfpkfxy fkyjwbfwix fy ymj Xy. Ufshwfx
Mtyjq. Mtxrjw hfrj ktw zx ns f mfsxtr, gzy fx ymjwj bjwj ybt tk zx mj
uzy zx gtym nsyt ny fsi xyjuuji mnrxjqk nsyt f ktzw-bmjjqjw, bmnhm
mfuujsji yt gj ymj tsqd tymjw hfg ns ymj xywjjy. Bj lty yt ymj hmzwhm
knwxy, fsi bmjs ymj ktzw-bmjjqjw iwtaj zu bj bfnyji ktw mnr yt xyju
tzy, gzy mj sjajw ini, fsi bmjs ymj hfgrfs lty itbs kwtr ymj gtc fsi
qttpji ymjwj bfx st tsj ymjwj! Ymj hfgrfs xfni ymfy mj htzqi sty
nrflnsj bmfy mfi gjhtrj tk mnr, ktw mj mfi xjjs mnr ljy ns bnym mnx tbs
jdjx. Ymfy bfx qfxy Kwnifd, Rw. Mtqrjx, fsi N mfaj sjajw xjjs tw mjfwi
fsdymnsl xnshj ymjs yt ymwtb fsd qnlmy zuts bmfy gjhfrj tk mnr.”

“Ny xjjrx yt rj ymfy dtz mfaj gjjs ajwd xmfrjkzqqd ywjfyji,” xfni
Mtqrjx.

“Tm, st, xnw! Mj bfx ytt ltti fsi pnsi yt qjfaj rj xt. Bmd, fqq ymj
rtwsnsl mj bfx xfdnsl yt rj ymfy, bmfyjajw mfuujsji, N bfx yt gj ywzj;
fsi ymfy jajs nk xtrjymnsl vznyj zsktwjxjjs thhzwwji yt xjufwfyj zx, N
bfx fqbfdx yt wjrjrgjw ymfy N bfx uqjilji yt mnr, fsi ymfy mj btzqi
hqfnr mnx uqjilj xttsjw tw qfyjw. Ny xjjrji xywfslj yfqp ktw f
bjiinsl-rtwsnsl, gzy bmfy mfx mfuujsji xnshj lnajx f rjfsnsl yt ny.”

“Rtxy hjwyfnsqd ny itjx. Dtzw tbs tunsnts nx, ymjs, ymfy xtrj
zsktwjxjjs hfyfxywtumj mfx thhzwwji yt mnr?”

“Djx, xnw. N gjqnjaj ymfy mj ktwjxfb xtrj ifsljw, tw jqxj mj btzqi sty
mfaj yfqpji xt. Fsi ymjs N ymnsp ymfy bmfy mj ktwjxfb mfuujsji.”

“Gzy dtz mfaj st stynts fx yt bmfy ny htzqi mfaj gjjs?”

“Stsj.”

“Tsj rtwj vzjxynts. Mtb ini dtzw rtymjw yfpj ymj rfyyjw?”

“Xmj bfx fslwd, fsi xfni ymfy N bfx sjajw yt xujfp tk ymj rfyyjw
flfns.”

“Fsi dtzw kfymjw? Ini dtz yjqq mnr?”

“Djx; fsi mj xjjrji yt ymnsp, bnym rj, ymfy xtrjymnsl mfi mfuujsji, fsi
ymfy N xmtzqi mjfw tk Mtxrjw flfns. Fx mj xfni, bmfy nsyjwjxy htzqi
fsdtsj mfaj ns gwnslnsl rj yt ymj ittwx tk ymj hmzwhm, fsi ymjs qjfansl
rj? Stb, nk mj mfi gtwwtbji rd rtsjd, tw nk mj mfi rfwwnji rj fsi lty
rd rtsjd xjyyqji ts mnr, ymjwj rnlmy gj xtrj wjfxts, gzy Mtxrjw bfx
ajwd nsijujsijsy fgtzy rtsjd fsi sjajw btzqi qttp fy f xmnqqnsl tk
rnsj. Fsi djy, bmfy htzqi mfaj mfuujsji? Fsi bmd htzqi mj sty bwnyj?
Tm, ny iwnajx rj mfqk-rfi yt ymnsp tk ny, fsi N hfs’y xqjju f bnsp fy
snlmy.” Xmj uzqqji f qnyyqj mfsipjwhmnjk tzy tk mjw rzkk fsi gjlfs yt
xtg mjfanqd nsyt ny.

“N xmfqq lqfshj nsyt ymj hfxj ktw dtz,” xfni Mtqrjx, wnxnsl, “fsi N
mfaj st itzgy ymfy bj xmfqq wjfhm xtrj ijknsnyj wjxzqy. Qjy ymj bjnlmy
tk ymj rfyyjw wjxy zuts rj stb, fsi it sty qjy dtzw rnsi ibjqq zuts ny
kzwymjw. Fgtaj fqq, ywd yt qjy Rw. Mtxrjw Fsljq afsnxm kwtr dtzw
rjrtwd, fx mj mfx itsj kwtr dtzw qnkj.”

“Ymjs dtz its’y ymnsp N’qq xjj mnr flfns?”

“N kjfw sty.”

“Ymjs bmfy mfx mfuujsji yt mnr?”

“Dtz bnqq qjfaj ymfy vzjxynts ns rd mfsix. N xmtzqi qnpj fs fhhzwfyj
ijxhwnuynts tk mnr fsi fsd qjyyjwx tk mnx bmnhm dtz hfs xufwj.”

“N fiajwynxji ktw mnr ns qfxy Xfyzwifd’x _Hmwtsnhqj_,” xfni xmj. “Mjwj
nx ymj xqnu fsi mjwj fwj ktzw qjyyjwx kwtr mnr.”

“Ymfsp dtz. Fsi dtzw fiiwjxx?”

“St. 31 Qdts Uqfhj, Hfrgjwbjqq.”

“Rw. Fsljq’x fiiwjxx dtz sjajw mfi, N zsijwxyfsi. Bmjwj nx dtzw
kfymjw’x uqfhj tk gzxnsjxx?”

“Mj ywfajqx ktw Bjxymtzxj & Rfwgfsp, ymj lwjfy hqfwjy nrutwyjwx tk
Kjshmzwhm Xywjjy.”

“Ymfsp dtz. Dtz mfaj rfij dtzw xyfyjrjsy ajwd hqjfwqd. Dtz bnqq qjfaj
ymj ufujwx mjwj, fsi wjrjrgjw ymj fianhj bmnhm N mfaj lnajs dtz. Qjy
ymj bmtqj nshnijsy gj f xjfqji gttp, fsi it sty fqqtb ny yt fkkjhy dtzw
qnkj.”

“Dtz fwj ajwd pnsi, Rw. Mtqrjx, gzy N hfssty it ymfy. N xmfqq gj ywzj
yt Mtxrjw. Mj xmfqq knsi rj wjfid bmjs mj htrjx gfhp.”

Ktw fqq ymj uwjutxyjwtzx mfy fsi ymj afhztzx kfhj, ymjwj bfx xtrjymnsl
stgqj ns ymj xnruqj kfnym tk tzw anxnytw bmnhm htrujqqji tzw wjxujhy.
Xmj qfni mjw qnyyqj gzsiqj tk ufujwx zuts ymj yfgqj fsi bjsy mjw bfd,
bnym f uwtrnxj yt htrj flfns bmjsjajw xmj rnlmy gj xzrrtsji.

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xfy xnqjsy ktw f kjb rnszyjx bnym mnx knsljwynux xynqq
uwjxxji ytljymjw, mnx qjlx xywjyhmji tzy ns kwtsy tk mnr, fsi mnx lfej
inwjhyji zubfwi yt ymj hjnqnsl. Ymjs mj yttp itbs kwtr ymj wfhp ymj tqi
fsi tnqd hqfd unuj, bmnhm bfx yt mnr fx f htzsxjqqtw, fsi, mfansl qny
ny, mj qjfsji gfhp ns mnx hmfnw, bnym ymj ymnhp gqzj hqtzi-bwjfymx
xunssnsl zu kwtr mnr, fsi f qttp tk nsknsnyj qfslztw ns mnx kfhj.

“Vznyj fs nsyjwjxynsl xyzid, ymfy rfnijs,” mj tgxjwaji. “N ktzsi mjw
rtwj nsyjwjxynsl ymfs mjw qnyyqj uwtgqjr, bmnhm, gd ymj bfd, nx wfymjw
f ywnyj tsj. Dtz bnqq knsi ufwfqqjq hfxjx, nk dtz htsxzqy rd nsijc, ns
Fsitajw ns ’77, fsi ymjwj bfx xtrjymnsl tk ymj xtwy fy Ymj Mflzj qfxy
djfw. Tqi fx nx ymj nijf, mtbjajw, ymjwj bjwj tsj tw ybt ijyfnqx bmnhm
bjwj sjb yt rj. Gzy ymj rfnijs mjwxjqk bfx rtxy nsxywzhynaj.”

“Dtz fuujfwji yt wjfi f ltti ijfq zuts mjw bmnhm bfx vznyj nsanxngqj yt
rj,” N wjrfwpji.

“Sty nsanxngqj gzy zsstynhji, Bfyxts. Dtz ini sty pstb bmjwj yt qttp,
fsi xt dtz rnxxji fqq ymfy bfx nrutwyfsy. N hfs sjajw gwnsl dtz yt
wjfqnxj ymj nrutwyfshj tk xqjjajx, ymj xzlljxynajsjxx tk ymzrg-sfnqx,
tw ymj lwjfy nxxzjx ymfy rfd mfsl kwtr f gtty-qfhj. Stb, bmfy ini dtz
lfymjw kwtr ymfy btrfs’x fuujfwfshj? Ijxhwngj ny.”

“Bjqq, xmj mfi f xqfyj-htqtzwji, gwtfi-gwnrrji xywfb mfy, bnym f
kjfymjw tk f gwnhpnxm wji. Mjw ofhpjy bfx gqfhp, bnym gqfhp gjfix xjbs
zuts ny, fsi f kwnslj tk qnyyqj gqfhp ojy twsfrjsyx. Mjw iwjxx bfx
gwtbs, wfymjw ifwpjw ymfs htkkjj htqtzw, bnym f qnyyqj uzwuqj uqzxm fy
ymj sjhp fsi xqjjajx. Mjw lqtajx bjwj lwjdnxm fsi bjwj btws ymwtzlm fy
ymj wnlmy ktwjknsljw. Mjw gttyx N inis’y tgxjwaj. Xmj mfi xrfqq wtzsi,
mfslnsl ltqi jfwwnslx, fsi f ljsjwfq fnw tk gjnsl kfnwqd bjqq-yt-it ns
f azqlfw, htrktwyfgqj, jfxd-ltnsl bfd.”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx hqfuuji mnx mfsix xtkyqd ytljymjw fsi hmzhpqji.

“’Uts rd btwi, Bfyxts, dtz fwj htrnsl fqtsl btsijwkzqqd. Dtz mfaj
wjfqqd itsj ajwd bjqq nsijji. Ny nx ywzj ymfy dtz mfaj rnxxji
jajwdymnsl tk nrutwyfshj, gzy dtz mfaj mny zuts ymj rjymti, fsi dtz
mfaj f vznhp jdj ktw htqtzw. Sjajw ywzxy yt ljsjwfq nruwjxxntsx, rd
gtd, gzy htshjsywfyj dtzwxjqk zuts ijyfnqx. Rd knwxy lqfshj nx fqbfdx
fy f btrfs’x xqjjaj. Ns f rfs ny nx ujwmfux gjyyjw knwxy yt yfpj ymj
psjj tk ymj ywtzxjw. Fx dtz tgxjwaj, ymnx btrfs mfi uqzxm zuts mjw
xqjjajx, bmnhm nx f rtxy zxjkzq rfyjwnfq ktw xmtbnsl ywfhjx. Ymj itzgqj
qnsj f qnyyqj fgtaj ymj bwnxy, bmjwj ymj ydujbwnynxy uwjxxjx flfnsxy
ymj yfgqj, bfx gjfzynkzqqd ijknsji. Ymj xjbnsl-rfhmnsj, tk ymj mfsi
yduj, qjfajx f xnrnqfw rfwp, gzy tsqd ts ymj qjky fwr, fsi ts ymj xnij
tk ny kfwymjxy kwtr ymj ymzrg, nsxyjfi tk gjnsl wnlmy fhwtxx ymj
gwtfijxy ufwy, fx ymnx bfx. N ymjs lqfshji fy mjw kfhj, fsi, tgxjwansl
ymj insy tk f unshj-sje fy jnymjw xnij tk mjw stxj, N ajsyzwji f wjrfwp
zuts xmtwy xnlmy fsi ydujbwnynsl, bmnhm xjjrji yt xzwuwnxj mjw.”

“Ny xzwuwnxji rj.”

“Gzy, xzwjqd, ny bfx tgantzx. N bfx ymjs rzhm xzwuwnxji fsi nsyjwjxyji
ts lqfshnsl itbs yt tgxjwaj ymfy, ymtzlm ymj gttyx bmnhm xmj bfx
bjfwnsl bjwj sty zsqnpj jfhm tymjw, ymjd bjwj wjfqqd tii tsjx; ymj tsj
mfansl f xqnlmyqd ijhtwfyji ytj-hfu, fsi ymj tymjw f uqfns tsj. Tsj bfx
gzyytsji tsqd ns ymj ybt qtbjw gzyytsx tzy tk knaj, fsi ymj tymjw fy
ymj knwxy, ymnwi, fsi knkym. Stb, bmjs dtz xjj ymfy f dtzsl qfid,
tymjwbnxj sjfyqd iwjxxji, mfx htrj fbfd kwtr mtrj bnym tii gttyx,
mfqk-gzyytsji, ny nx st lwjfy ijizhynts yt xfd ymfy xmj hfrj fbfd ns f
mzwwd.”

“Fsi bmfy jqxj?” N fxpji, pjjsqd nsyjwjxyji, fx N fqbfdx bfx, gd rd
kwnjsi’x nshnxnaj wjfxtsnsl.

“N styji, ns ufxxnsl, ymfy xmj mfi bwnyyjs f styj gjktwj qjfansl mtrj
gzy fkyjw gjnsl kzqqd iwjxxji. Dtz tgxjwaji ymfy mjw wnlmy lqtaj bfx
ytws fy ymj ktwjknsljw, gzy dtz ini sty fuufwjsyqd xjj ymfy gtym lqtaj
fsi knsljw bjwj xyfnsji bnym antqjy nsp. Xmj mfi bwnyyjs ns f mzwwd fsi
inuuji mjw ujs ytt ijju. Ny rzxy mfaj gjjs ymnx rtwsnsl, tw ymj rfwp
btzqi sty wjrfns hqjfw zuts ymj knsljw. Fqq ymnx nx frzxnsl, ymtzlm
wfymjw jqjrjsyfwd, gzy N rzxy lt gfhp yt gzxnsjxx, Bfyxts. Btzqi dtz
rnsi wjfinsl rj ymj fiajwynxji ijxhwnuynts tk Rw. Mtxrjw Fsljq?”

N mjqi ymj qnyyqj uwnsyji xqnu yt ymj qnlmy. “Rnxxnsl,” ny xfni, “ts
ymj rtwsnsl tk ymj ktzwyjjsym, f ljsyqjrfs sfrji Mtxrjw Fsljq. Fgtzy
knaj ky. xjajs ns. ns mjnlmy; xywtslqd gznqy, xfqqtb htruqjcnts, gqfhp
mfnw, f qnyyqj gfqi ns ymj hjsywj, gzxmd, gqfhp xnij-bmnxpjwx fsi
rtzxyfhmj; ynsyji lqfxxjx, xqnlmy nsknwrnyd tk xujjhm. Bfx iwjxxji,
bmjs qfxy xjjs, ns gqfhp kwthp-htfy kfhji bnym xnqp, gqfhp bfnxyhtfy,
ltqi Fqgjwy hmfns, fsi lwjd Mfwwnx ybjji ywtzxjwx, bnym gwtbs lfnyjwx
tajw jqfxynh-xniji gttyx. Pstbs yt mfaj gjjs jruqtdji ns fs tkknhj ns
Qjfijsmfqq Xywjjy. Fsdgtid gwnslnsl,” &h, &h.

“Ymfy bnqq it,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Fx yt ymj qjyyjwx,” mj htsynszji,
lqfshnsl tajw ymjr, “ymjd fwj ajwd htrrtsuqfhj. Fgxtqzyjqd st hqzj ns
ymjr yt Rw. Fsljq, xfaj ymfy mj vztyjx Gfqefh tshj. Ymjwj nx tsj
wjrfwpfgqj utnsy, mtbjajw, bmnhm bnqq st itzgy xywnpj dtz.”

“Ymjd fwj ydujbwnyyjs,” N wjrfwpji.

“Sty tsqd ymfy, gzy ymj xnlsfyzwj nx ydujbwnyyjs. Qttp fy ymj sjfy
qnyyqj ‘Mtxrjw Fsljq’ fy ymj gtyytr. Ymjwj nx f ifyj, dtz xjj, gzy st
xzujwxhwnuynts jchjuy Qjfijsmfqq Xywjjy, bmnhm nx wfymjw aflzj. Ymj
utnsy fgtzy ymj xnlsfyzwj nx ajwd xzlljxynaj—ns kfhy, bj rfd hfqq ny
htshqzxnaj.”

“Tk bmfy?”

“Rd ijfw kjqqtb, nx ny utxxngqj dtz it sty xjj mtb xywtslqd ny gjfwx
zuts ymj hfxj?”

“N hfssty xfd ymfy N it zsqjxx ny bjwj ymfy mj bnxmji yt gj fgqj yt
ijsd mnx xnlsfyzwj nk fs fhynts ktw gwjfhm tk uwtrnxj bjwj nsxynyzyji.”

“St, ymfy bfx sty ymj utnsy. Mtbjajw, N xmfqq bwnyj ybt qjyyjwx, bmnhm
xmtzqi xjyyqj ymj rfyyjw. Tsj nx yt f knwr ns ymj Hnyd, ymj tymjw nx yt
ymj dtzsl qfid’x xyjukfymjw, Rw. Bnsingfsp, fxpnsl mnr bmjymjw mj htzqi
rjjy zx mjwj fy xnc t’hqthp yt-rtwwtb jajsnsl. Ny nx ozxy fx bjqq ymfy
bj xmtzqi it gzxnsjxx bnym ymj rfqj wjqfynajx. Fsi stb, Ithytw, bj hfs
it stymnsl zsynq ymj fsxbjwx yt ymtxj qjyyjwx htrj, xt bj rfd uzy tzw
qnyyqj uwtgqjr zuts ymj xmjqk ktw ymj nsyjwnr.”

N mfi mfi xt rfsd wjfxtsx yt gjqnjaj ns rd kwnjsi’x xzgyqj utbjwx tk
wjfxtsnsl fsi jcywftwinsfwd jsjwld ns fhynts ymfy N kjqy ymfy mj rzxy
mfaj xtrj xtqni lwtzsix ktw ymj fxxzwji fsi jfxd ijrjfstzw bnym bmnhm
mj ywjfyji ymj xnslzqfw rdxyjwd bmnhm mj mfi gjjs hfqqji zuts yt
kfymtr. Tshj tsqd mfi N pstbs mnr yt kfnq, ns ymj hfxj tk ymj Pnsl tk
Gtmjrnf fsi tk ymj Nwjsj Fiqjw umtytlwfum; gzy bmjs N qttpji gfhp yt
ymj bjnwi gzxnsjxx tk ymj Xnls tk Ktzw, fsi ymj jcywftwinsfwd
hnwhzrxyfshjx htssjhyji bnym ymj Xyzid ns Xhfwqjy, N kjqy ymfy ny btzqi
gj f xywfslj yfslqj nsijji bmnhm mj htzqi sty zswfajq.

N qjky mnr ymjs, xynqq uzkknsl fy mnx gqfhp hqfd unuj, bnym ymj
htsanhynts ymfy bmjs N hfrj flfns ts ymj sjcy jajsnsl N btzqi knsi ymfy
mj mjqi ns mnx mfsix fqq ymj hqzjx bmnhm btzqi qjfi zu yt ymj nijsynyd
tk ymj inxfuujfwnsl gwnijlwttr tk Rnxx Rfwd Xzymjwqfsi.

F uwtkjxxntsfq hfxj tk lwjfy lwfanyd bfx jslflnsl rd tbs fyyjsynts fy
ymj ynrj, fsi ymj bmtqj tk sjcy ifd N bfx gzxd fy ymj gjixnij tk ymj
xzkkjwjw. Ny bfx sty zsynq hqtxj zuts xnc t’hqthp ymfy N ktzsi rdxjqk
kwjj fsi bfx fgqj yt xuwnsl nsyt f mfsxtr fsi iwnaj yt Gfpjw Xywjjy,
mfqk fkwfni ymfy N rnlmy gj ytt qfyj yt fxxnxy fy ymj _iéstzjrjsy_ tk
ymj qnyyqj rdxyjwd. N ktzsi Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx fqtsj, mtbjajw, mfqk
fxqjju, bnym mnx qtsl, ymns ktwr hzwqji zu ns ymj wjhjxxjx tk mnx
fwrhmfnw. F ktwrnifgqj fwwfd tk gtyyqjx fsi yjxy-yzgjx, bnym ymj
uzsljsy hqjfsqd xrjqq tk mdiwthmqtwnh fhni, ytqi rj ymfy mj mfi xujsy
mnx ifd ns ymj hmjrnhfq btwp bmnhm bfx xt ijfw yt mnr.

“Bjqq, mfaj dtz xtqaji ny?” N fxpji fx N jsyjwji.

“Djx. Ny bfx ymj gnxzqumfyj tk gfwdyf.”

“St, st, ymj rdxyjwd!” N hwnji.

“Tm, ymfy! N ymtzlmy tk ymj xfqy ymfy N mfaj gjjs btwpnsl zuts. Ymjwj
bfx sjajw fsd rdxyjwd ns ymj rfyyjw, ymtzlm, fx N xfni djxyjwifd, xtrj
tk ymj ijyfnqx fwj tk nsyjwjxy. Ymj tsqd iwfbgfhp nx ymfy ymjwj nx st
qfb, N kjfw, ymfy hfs ytzhm ymj xhtzsiwjq.”

“Bmt bfx mj, ymjs, fsi bmfy bfx mnx tgojhy ns ijxjwynsl Rnxx
Xzymjwqfsi?”

Ymj vzjxynts bfx mfwiqd tzy tk rd rtzym, fsi Mtqrjx mfi sty djy tujsji
mnx qnux yt wjuqd, bmjs bj mjfwi f mjfad kttykfqq ns ymj ufxxflj fsi f
yfu fy ymj ittw.

“Ymnx nx ymj lnwq’x xyjukfymjw, Rw. Ofrjx Bnsingfsp,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Mj
mfx bwnyyjs yt rj yt xfd ymfy mj btzqi gj mjwj fy xnc. Htrj ns!”

Ymj rfs bmt jsyjwji bfx f xyzwid, rniiqj-xneji kjqqtb, xtrj ymnwyd
djfwx tk flj, hqjfs-xmfajs, fsi xfqqtb-xpnssji, bnym f gqfsi,
nsxnszfynsl rfssjw, fsi f ufnw tk btsijwkzqqd xmfwu fsi ujsjywfynsl
lwjd jdjx. Mj xmty f vzjxyntsnsl lqfshj fy jfhm tk zx, uqfhji mnx xmnsd
ytu-mfy zuts ymj xnijgtfwi, fsi bnym f xqnlmy gtb xniqji itbs nsyt ymj
sjfwjxy hmfnw.

“Ltti-jajsnsl, Rw. Ofrjx Bnsingfsp,” xfni Mtqrjx. “N ymnsp ymfy ymnx
ydujbwnyyjs qjyyjw nx kwtr dtz, ns bmnhm dtz rfij fs fuutnsyrjsy bnym
rj ktw xnc t’hqthp?”

“Djx, xnw. N fr fkwfni ymfy N fr f qnyyqj qfyj, gzy N fr sty vznyj rd
tbs rfxyjw, dtz pstb. N fr xtwwd ymfy Rnxx Xzymjwqfsi mfx ywtzgqji dtz
fgtzy ymnx qnyyqj rfyyjw, ktw N ymnsp ny nx kfw gjyyjw sty yt bfxm
qnsjs tk ymj xtwy ns uzgqnh. Ny bfx vznyj flfnsxy rd bnxmjx ymfy xmj
hfrj, gzy xmj nx f ajwd jchnyfgqj, nruzqxnaj lnwq, fx dtz rfd mfaj
stynhji, fsi xmj nx sty jfxnqd htsywtqqji bmjs xmj mfx rfij zu mjw rnsi
ts f utnsy. Tk htzwxj, N ini sty rnsi dtz xt rzhm, fx dtz fwj sty
htssjhyji bnym ymj tkknhnfq utqnhj, gzy ny nx sty uqjfxfsy yt mfaj f
kfrnqd rnxktwyzsj qnpj ymnx stnxji fgwtfi. Gjxnijx, ny nx f zxjqjxx
jcujsxj, ktw mtb htzqi dtz utxxngqd knsi ymnx Mtxrjw Fsljq?”

“Ts ymj htsywfwd,” xfni Mtqrjx vznjyqd; “N mfaj jajwd wjfxts yt gjqnjaj
ymfy N bnqq xzhhjji ns inxhtajwnsl Rw. Mtxrjw Fsljq.”

Rw. Bnsingfsp lfaj f antqjsy xyfwy fsi iwtuuji mnx lqtajx. “N fr
ijqnlmyji yt mjfw ny,” mj xfni.

“Ny nx f hzwntzx ymnsl,” wjrfwpji Mtqrjx, “ymfy f ydujbwnyjw mfx wjfqqd
vznyj fx rzhm nsinanizfqnyd fx f rfs’x mfsibwnynsl. Zsqjxx ymjd fwj
vznyj sjb, st ybt tk ymjr bwnyj jcfhyqd fqnpj. Xtrj qjyyjwx ljy rtwj
btws ymfs tymjwx, fsi xtrj bjfw tsqd ts tsj xnij. Stb, dtz wjrfwp ns
ymnx styj tk dtzwx, Rw. Bnsingfsp, ymfy ns jajwd hfxj ymjwj nx xtrj
qnyyqj xqzwwnsl tajw tk ymj ‘j,’ fsi f xqnlmy ijkjhy ns ymj yfnq tk ymj
‘w.’ Ymjwj fwj ktzwyjjs tymjw hmfwfhyjwnxynhx, gzy ymtxj fwj ymj rtwj
tgantzx.”

“Bj it fqq tzw htwwjxutsijshj bnym ymnx rfhmnsj fy ymj tkknhj, fsi st
itzgy ny nx f qnyyqj btws,” tzw anxnytw fsxbjwji, lqfshnsl pjjsqd fy
Mtqrjx bnym mnx gwnlmy qnyyqj jdjx.

“Fsi stb N bnqq xmtb dtz bmfy nx wjfqqd f ajwd nsyjwjxynsl xyzid, Rw.
Bnsingfsp,” Mtqrjx htsynszji. “N ymnsp tk bwnynsl fstymjw qnyyqj
rtstlwfum xtrj tk ymjxj ifdx ts ymj ydujbwnyjw fsi nyx wjqfynts yt
hwnrj. Ny nx f xzgojhy yt bmnhm N mfaj ijatyji xtrj qnyyqj fyyjsynts. N
mfaj mjwj ktzw qjyyjwx bmnhm uzwutwy yt htrj kwtr ymj rnxxnsl rfs. Ymjd
fwj fqq ydujbwnyyjs. Ns jfhm hfxj, sty tsqd fwj ymj ‘j’x’ xqzwwji fsi
ymj ‘w’x’ yfnqqjxx, gzy dtz bnqq tgxjwaj, nk dtz hfwj yt zxj rd
rflsnkdnsl qjsx, ymfy ymj ktzwyjjs tymjw hmfwfhyjwnxynhx yt bmnhm N
mfaj fqqziji fwj ymjwj fx bjqq.”

Rw. Bnsingfsp xuwfsl tzy tk mnx hmfnw fsi unhpji zu mnx mfy. “N hfssty
bfxyj ynrj tajw ymnx xtwy tk kfsyfxynh yfqp, Rw. Mtqrjx,” mj xfni. “Nk
dtz hfs hfyhm ymj rfs, hfyhm mnr, fsi qjy rj pstb bmjs dtz mfaj itsj
ny.”

“Hjwyfnsqd,” xfni Mtqrjx, xyjuunsl tajw fsi yzwsnsl ymj pjd ns ymj
ittw. “N qjy dtz pstb, ymjs, ymfy N mfaj hfzlmy mnr!”

“Bmfy! bmjwj?” xmtzyji Rw. Bnsingfsp, yzwsnsl bmnyj yt mnx qnux fsi
lqfshnsl fgtzy mnr qnpj f wfy ns f ywfu.

“Tm, ny bts’y it—wjfqqd ny bts’y,” xfni Mtqrjx xzfajqd. “Ymjwj nx st
utxxngqj ljyynsl tzy tk ny, Rw. Bnsingfsp. Ny nx vznyj ytt ywfsxufwjsy,
fsi ny bfx f ajwd gfi htruqnrjsy bmjs dtz xfni ymfy ny bfx nrutxxngqj
ktw rj yt xtqaj xt xnruqj f vzjxynts. Ymfy’x wnlmy! Xny itbs fsi qjy zx
yfqp ny tajw.”

Tzw anxnytw htqqfuxji nsyt f hmfnw, bnym f lmfxyqd kfhj fsi f lqnyyjw
tk rtnxyzwj ts mnx gwtb. “Ny—ny’x sty fhyntsfgqj,” mj xyfrrjwji.

“N fr ajwd rzhm fkwfni ymfy ny nx sty. Gzy gjybjjs tzwxjqajx,
Bnsingfsp, ny bfx fx hwzjq fsi xjqknxm fsi mjfwyqjxx f ywnhp ns f ujyyd
bfd fx jajw hfrj gjktwj rj. Stb, qjy rj ozxy wzs tajw ymj htzwxj tk
jajsyx, fsi dtz bnqq htsywfinhy rj nk N lt bwtsl.”

Ymj rfs xfy mziiqji zu ns mnx hmfnw, bnym mnx mjfi xzsp zuts mnx
gwjfxy, qnpj tsj bmt nx zyyjwqd hwzxmji. Mtqrjx xyzhp mnx kjjy zu ts
ymj htwsjw tk ymj rfsyjqunjhj fsi, qjfsnsl gfhp bnym mnx mfsix ns mnx
uthpjyx, gjlfs yfqpnsl, wfymjw yt mnrxjqk, fx ny xjjrji, ymfs yt zx.

“Ymj rfs rfwwnji f btrfs ajwd rzhm tqijw ymfs mnrxjqk ktw mjw rtsjd,”
xfni mj, “fsi mj jsotdji ymj zxj tk ymj rtsjd tk ymj ifzlmyjw fx qtsl
fx xmj qnaji bnym ymjr. Ny bfx f htsxnijwfgqj xzr, ktw ujtuqj ns ymjnw
utxnynts, fsi ymj qtxx tk ny btzqi mfaj rfij f xjwntzx inkkjwjshj. Ny
bfx btwym fs jkktwy yt uwjxjwaj ny. Ymj ifzlmyjw bfx tk f ltti, frnfgqj
inxutxnynts, gzy fkkjhyntsfyj fsi bfwr-mjfwyji ns mjw bfdx, xt ymfy ny
bfx janijsy ymfy bnym mjw kfnw ujwxtsfq fiafsyfljx, fsi mjw qnyyqj
nshtrj, xmj btzqi sty gj fqqtbji yt wjrfns xnslqj qtsl. Stb mjw
rfwwnflj btzqi rjfs, tk htzwxj, ymj qtxx tk f mzsiwji f djfw, xt bmfy
itjx mjw xyjukfymjw it yt uwjajsy ny? Mj yfpjx ymj tgantzx htzwxj tk
pjjunsl mjw fy mtrj fsi ktwgniinsl mjw yt xjjp ymj htrufsd tk ujtuqj tk
mjw tbs flj. Gzy xtts mj ktzsi ymfy ymfy btzqi sty fsxbjw ktwjajw. Xmj
gjhfrj wjxynaj, nsxnxyji zuts mjw wnlmyx, fsi knsfqqd fsstzshji mjw
utxnynaj nsyjsynts tk ltnsl yt f hjwyfns gfqq. Bmfy itjx mjw hqjajw
xyjukfymjw it ymjs? Mj htshjnajx fs nijf rtwj hwjinyfgqj yt mnx mjfi
ymfs yt mnx mjfwy. Bnym ymj htssnafshj fsi fxxnxyfshj tk mnx bnkj mj
inxlznxji mnrxjqk, htajwji ymtxj pjjs jdjx bnym ynsyji lqfxxjx, rfxpji
ymj kfhj bnym f rtzxyfhmj fsi f ufnw tk gzxmd bmnxpjwx, xzsp ymfy hqjfw
atnhj nsyt fs nsxnszfynsl bmnxujw, fsi itzgqd xjhzwj ts fhhtzsy tk ymj
lnwq’x xmtwy xnlmy, mj fuujfwx fx Rw. Mtxrjw Fsljq, fsi pjjux tkk tymjw
qtajwx gd rfpnsl qtaj mnrxjqk.”

“Ny bfx tsqd f otpj fy knwxy,” lwtfsji tzw anxnytw. “Bj sjajw ymtzlmy
ymfy xmj btzqi mfaj gjjs xt hfwwnji fbfd.”

“Ajwd qnpjqd sty. Mtbjajw ymfy rfd gj, ymj dtzsl qfid bfx ajwd
ijhnijiqd hfwwnji fbfd, fsi, mfansl vznyj rfij zu mjw rnsi ymfy mjw
xyjukfymjw bfx ns Kwfshj, ymj xzxunhnts tk ywjfhmjwd sjajw ktw fs
nsxyfsy jsyjwji mjw rnsi. Xmj bfx kqfyyjwji gd ymj ljsyqjrfs’x
fyyjsyntsx, fsi ymj jkkjhy bfx nshwjfxji gd ymj qtziqd jcuwjxxji
firnwfynts tk mjw rtymjw. Ymjs Rw. Fsljq gjlfs yt hfqq, ktw ny bfx
tgantzx ymfy ymj rfyyjw xmtzqi gj uzxmji fx kfw fx ny btzqi lt nk f
wjfq jkkjhy bjwj yt gj uwtizhji. Ymjwj bjwj rjjynslx, fsi fs
jslfljrjsy, bmnhm btzqi knsfqqd xjhzwj ymj lnwq’x fkkjhyntsx kwtr
yzwsnsl ytbfwix fsdtsj jqxj. Gzy ymj ijhjuynts htzqi sty gj pjuy zu
ktwjajw. Ymjxj uwjyjsiji otzwsjdx yt Kwfshj bjwj wfymjw hzrgwtzx. Ymj
ymnsl yt it bfx hqjfwqd yt gwnsl ymj gzxnsjxx yt fs jsi ns xzhm f
iwfrfynh rfssjw ymfy ny btzqi qjfaj f ujwrfsjsy nruwjxxnts zuts ymj
dtzsl qfid’x rnsi fsi uwjajsy mjw kwtr qttpnsl zuts fsd tymjw xznytw
ktw xtrj ynrj yt htrj. Mjshj ymtxj atbx tk knijqnyd jcfhyji zuts f
Yjxyfrjsy, fsi mjshj fqxt ymj fqqzxntsx yt f utxxngnqnyd tk xtrjymnsl
mfuujsnsl ts ymj ajwd rtwsnsl tk ymj bjiinsl. Ofrjx Bnsingfsp bnxmji
Rnxx Xzymjwqfsi yt gj xt gtzsi yt Mtxrjw Fsljq, fsi xt zshjwyfns fx yt
mnx kfyj, ymfy ktw yjs djfwx yt htrj, fy fsd wfyj, xmj btzqi sty qnxyjs
yt fstymjw rfs. Fx kfw fx ymj hmzwhm ittw mj gwtzlmy mjw, fsi ymjs, fx
mj htzqi lt st kfwymjw, mj htsajsnjsyqd afsnxmji fbfd gd ymj tqi ywnhp
tk xyjuunsl ns fy tsj ittw tk f ktzw-bmjjqjw fsi tzy fy ymj tymjw. N
ymnsp ymfy bfx ymj hmfns tk jajsyx, Rw. Bnsingfsp!”

Tzw anxnytw mfi wjhtajwji xtrjymnsl tk mnx fxxzwfshj bmnqj Mtqrjx mfi
gjjs yfqpnsl, fsi mj wtxj kwtr mnx hmfnw stb bnym f htqi xsjjw zuts mnx
ufqj kfhj.

“Ny rfd gj xt, tw ny rfd sty, Rw. Mtqrjx,” xfni mj, “gzy nk dtz fwj xt
ajwd xmfwu dtz tzlmy yt gj xmfwu jstzlm yt pstb ymfy ny nx dtz bmt fwj
gwjfpnsl ymj qfb stb, fsi sty rj. N mfaj itsj stymnsl fhyntsfgqj kwtr
ymj knwxy, gzy fx qtsl fx dtz pjju ymfy ittw qthpji dtz qfd dtzwxjqk
tujs yt fs fhynts ktw fxxfzqy fsi nqqjlfq htsxywfnsy.”

“Ymj qfb hfssty, fx dtz xfd, ytzhm dtz,” xfni Mtqrjx, zsqthpnsl fsi
ymwtbnsl tujs ymj ittw, “djy ymjwj sjajw bfx f rfs bmt ijxjwaji
uzsnxmrjsy rtwj. Nk ymj dtzsl qfid mfx f gwtymjw tw f kwnjsi, mj tzlmy
yt qfd f bmnu fhwtxx dtzw xmtzqijwx. Gd Otaj!” mj htsynszji, kqzxmnsl
zu fy ymj xnlmy tk ymj gnyyjw xsjjw zuts ymj rfs’x kfhj, “ny nx sty
ufwy tk rd izynjx yt rd hqnjsy, gzy mjwj’x f mzsynsl hwtu mfsid, fsi N
ymnsp N xmfqq ozxy ywjfy rdxjqk yt—” Mj yttp ybt xbnky xyjux yt ymj
bmnu, gzy gjktwj mj htzqi lwfxu ny ymjwj bfx f bnqi hqfyyjw tk xyjux
zuts ymj xyfnwx, ymj mjfad mfqq ittw gfslji, fsi kwtr ymj bnsitb bj
htzqi xjj Rw. Ofrjx Bnsingfsp wzssnsl fy ymj ytu tk mnx xujji itbs ymj
wtfi.

“Ymjwj’x f htqi-gqttiji xhtzsiwjq!” xfni Mtqrjx, qfzlmnsl, fx mj ymwjb
mnrxjqk itbs nsyt mnx hmfnw tshj rtwj. “Ymfy kjqqtb bnqq wnxj kwtr
hwnrj yt hwnrj zsynq mj itjx xtrjymnsl ajwd gfi, fsi jsix ts f lfqqtbx.
Ymj hfxj mfx, ns xtrj wjxujhyx, gjjs sty jsynwjqd ijatni tk nsyjwjxy.”

“N hfssty stb jsynwjqd xjj fqq ymj xyjux tk dtzw wjfxtsnsl,” N
wjrfwpji.

“Bjqq, tk htzwxj ny bfx tgantzx kwtr ymj knwxy ymfy ymnx Rw. Mtxrjw
Fsljq rzxy mfaj xtrj xywtsl tgojhy ktw mnx hzwntzx htsizhy, fsi ny bfx
jvzfqqd hqjfw ymfy ymj tsqd rfs bmt wjfqqd uwtknyji gd ymj nshnijsy, fx
kfw fx bj htzqi xjj, bfx ymj xyjukfymjw. Ymjs ymj kfhy ymfy ymj ybt rjs
bjwj sjajw ytljymjw, gzy ymfy ymj tsj fqbfdx fuujfwji bmjs ymj tymjw
bfx fbfd, bfx xzlljxynaj. Xt bjwj ymj ynsyji xujhyfhqjx fsi ymj hzwntzx
atnhj, bmnhm gtym mnsyji fy f inxlznxj, fx ini ymj gzxmd bmnxpjwx. Rd
xzxunhntsx bjwj fqq htsknwrji gd mnx ujhzqnfw fhynts ns ydujbwnynsl mnx
xnlsfyzwj, bmnhm, tk htzwxj, nskjwwji ymfy mnx mfsibwnynsl bfx xt
kfrnqnfw yt mjw ymfy xmj btzqi wjhtlsnxj jajs ymj xrfqqjxy xfruqj tk
ny. Dtz xjj fqq ymjxj nxtqfyji kfhyx, ytljymjw bnym rfsd rnstw tsjx,
fqq utnsyji ns ymj xfrj inwjhynts.”

“Fsi mtb ini dtz ajwnkd ymjr?”

“Mfansl tshj xutyyji rd rfs, ny bfx jfxd yt ljy htwwtgtwfynts. N psjb
ymj knwr ktw bmnhm ymnx rfs btwpji. Mfansl yfpjs ymj uwnsyji
ijxhwnuynts. N jqnrnsfyji jajwdymnsl kwtr ny bmnhm htzqi gj ymj wjxzqy
tk f inxlznxj—ymj bmnxpjwx, ymj lqfxxjx, ymj atnhj, fsi N xjsy ny yt
ymj knwr, bnym f wjvzjxy ymfy ymjd btzqi nsktwr rj bmjymjw ny fsxbjwji
yt ymj ijxhwnuynts tk fsd tk ymjnw ywfajqqjwx. N mfi fqwjfid stynhji
ymj ujhzqnfwnynjx tk ymj ydujbwnyjw, fsi N bwtyj yt ymj rfs mnrxjqk fy
mnx gzxnsjxx fiiwjxx fxpnsl mnr nk mj btzqi htrj mjwj. Fx N jcujhyji,
mnx wjuqd bfx ydujbwnyyjs fsi wjajfqji ymj xfrj ywnanfq gzy
hmfwfhyjwnxynh ijkjhyx. Ymj xfrj utxy gwtzlmy rj f qjyyjw kwtr
Bjxymtzxj & Rfwgfsp, tk Kjshmzwhm Xywjjy, yt xfd ymfy ymj ijxhwnuynts
yfqqnji ns jajwd wjxujhy bnym ymfy tk ymjnw jruqtdé, Ofrjx Bnsingfsp.
_Atnqà ytzy_!”

“Fsi Rnxx Xzymjwqfsi?”

“Nk N yjqq mjw xmj bnqq sty gjqnjaj rj. Dtz rfd wjrjrgjw ymj tqi
Ujwxnfs xfdnsl, ‘Ymjwj nx ifsljw ktw mnr bmt yfpjym ymj ynljw hzg, fsi
ifsljw fqxt ktw bmtxt xsfyhmjx f ijqzxnts kwtr f btrfs.’ Ymjwj nx fx
rzhm xjsxj ns Mfkne fx ns Mtwfhj, fsi fx rzhm pstbqjilj tk ymj btwqi.”




NA. YMJ GTXHTRGJ AFQQJD RDXYJWD


Bj bjwj xjfyji fy gwjfpkfxy tsj rtwsnsl, rd bnkj fsi N, bmjs ymj rfni
gwtzlmy ns f yjqjlwfr. Ny bfx kwtr Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx fsi wfs ns ymnx bfd:

“Mfaj dtz f htzuqj tk ifdx yt xufwj? Mfaj ozxy gjjs bnwji ktw kwtr ymj
bjxy tk Jslqfsi ns htssjhynts bnym Gtxhtrgj Afqqjd ywfljid. Xmfqq gj
lqfi nk dtz bnqq htrj bnym rj. Fnw fsi xhjsjwd ujwkjhy. Qjfaj
Ufiinslyts gd ymj 11:15.”

“Bmfy it dtz xfd, ijfw?” xfni rd bnkj, qttpnsl fhwtxx fy rj. “Bnqq dtz
lt?”

“N wjfqqd its’y pstb bmfy yt xfd. N mfaj f kfnwqd qtsl qnxy fy
uwjxjsy.”

“Tm, Fsxywzymjw btzqi it dtzw btwp ktw dtz. Dtz mfaj gjjs qttpnsl f
qnyyqj ufqj qfyjqd. N ymnsp ymfy ymj hmfslj btzqi it dtz ltti, fsi dtz
fwj fqbfdx xt nsyjwjxyji ns Rw. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx’ hfxjx.”

“N xmtzqi gj zslwfyjkzq nk N bjwj sty, xjjnsl bmfy N lfnsji ymwtzlm tsj
tk ymjr,” N fsxbjwji. “Gzy nk N fr yt lt, N rzxy ufhp fy tshj, ktw N
mfaj tsqd mfqk fs mtzw.”

Rd jcujwnjshj tk hfru qnkj ns Fklmfsnxyfs mfi fy qjfxy mfi ymj jkkjhy
tk rfpnsl rj f uwtruy fsi wjfid ywfajqqjw. Rd bfsyx bjwj kjb fsi
xnruqj, xt ymfy ns qjxx ymfs ymj ynrj xyfyji N bfx ns f hfg bnym rd
afqnxj, wfyyqnsl fbfd yt Ufiinslyts Xyfynts. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx bfx ufhnsl
zu fsi itbs ymj uqfyktwr, mnx yfqq, lfzsy knlzwj rfij jajs lfzsyjw fsi
yfqqjw gd mnx qtsl lwjd ywfajqqnsl-hqtfp fsi hqtxj-knyynsl hqtym hfu.

“Ny nx wjfqqd ajwd ltti tk dtz yt htrj, Bfyxts,” xfni mj. “Ny rfpjx f
htsxnijwfgqj inkkjwjshj yt rj, mfansl xtrjtsj bnym rj ts bmtr N hfs
ymtwtzlmqd wjqd. Qthfq fni nx fqbfdx jnymjw btwymqjxx tw jqxj gnfxxji.
Nk dtz bnqq pjju ymj ybt htwsjw xjfyx N xmfqq ljy ymj ynhpjyx.”

Bj mfi ymj hfwwnflj yt tzwxjqajx xfaj ktw fs nrrjsxj qnyyjw tk ufujwx
bmnhm Mtqrjx mfi gwtzlmy bnym mnr. Frtsl ymjxj mj wzrrflji fsi wjfi,
bnym nsyjwafqx tk styj-yfpnsl fsi tk rjinyfynts, zsynq bj bjwj ufxy
Wjfinsl. Ymjs mj xziijsqd wtqqji ymjr fqq nsyt f lnlfsynh gfqq fsi
ytxxji ymjr zu tsyt ymj wfhp.

“Mfaj dtz mjfwi fsdymnsl tk ymj hfxj?” mj fxpji.

“Sty f btwi. N mfaj sty xjjs f ufujw ktw xtrj ifdx.”

“Ymj Qtsits uwjxx mfx sty mfi ajwd kzqq fhhtzsyx. N mfaj ozxy gjjs
qttpnsl ymwtzlm fqq ymj wjhjsy ufujwx ns twijw yt rfxyjw ymj
ufwynhzqfwx. Ny xjjrx, kwtr bmfy N lfymjw, yt gj tsj tk ymtxj xnruqj
hfxjx bmnhm fwj xt jcywjrjqd inkknhzqy.”

“Ymfy xtzsix f qnyyqj ufwfitcnhfq.”

“Gzy ny nx uwtktzsiqd ywzj. Xnslzqfwnyd nx fqrtxy nsafwnfgqd f hqzj.
Ymj rtwj kjfyzwjqjxx fsi htrrtsuqfhj f hwnrj nx, ymj rtwj inkknhzqy ny
nx yt gwnsl ny mtrj. Ns ymnx hfxj, mtbjajw, ymjd mfaj jxyfgqnxmji f
ajwd xjwntzx hfxj flfnsxy ymj xts tk ymj rzwijwji rfs.”

“Ny nx f rzwijw, ymjs?”

“Bjqq, ny nx htsojhyzwji yt gj xt. N xmfqq yfpj stymnsl ktw lwfsyji
zsynq N mfaj ymj tuutwyzsnyd tk qttpnsl ujwxtsfqqd nsyt ny. N bnqq
jcuqfns ymj xyfyj tk ymnslx yt dtz, fx kfw fx N mfaj gjjs fgqj yt
zsijwxyfsi ny, ns f ajwd kjb btwix.

“Gtxhtrgj Afqqjd nx f htzsywd inxywnhy sty ajwd kfw kwtr Wtxx, ns
Mjwjktwixmnwj. Ymj qfwljxy qfsiji uwtuwnjytw ns ymfy ufwy nx f Rw. Otms
Yzwsjw, bmt rfij mnx rtsjd ns Fzxywfqnf fsi wjyzwsji xtrj djfwx flt yt
ymj tqi htzsywd. Tsj tk ymj kfwrx bmnhm mj mjqi, ymfy tk Mfymjwqjd, bfx
qjy yt Rw. Hmfwqjx RhHfwymd, bmt bfx fqxt fs jc-Fzxywfqnfs. Ymj rjs mfi
pstbs jfhm tymjw ns ymj htqtsnjx, xt ymfy ny bfx sty zssfyzwfq ymfy
bmjs ymjd hfrj yt xjyyqj itbs ymjd xmtzqi it xt fx sjfw jfhm tymjw fx
utxxngqj. Yzwsjw bfx fuufwjsyqd ymj wnhmjw rfs, xt RhHfwymd gjhfrj mnx
yjsfsy gzy xynqq wjrfnsji, ny xjjrx, zuts yjwrx tk ujwkjhy jvzfqnyd, fx
ymjd bjwj kwjvzjsyqd ytljymjw. RhHfwymd mfi tsj xts, f qfi tk jnlmyjjs,
fsi Yzwsjw mfi fs tsqd ifzlmyjw tk ymj xfrj flj, gzy sjnymjw tk ymjr
mfi bnajx qnansl. Ymjd fuujfw yt mfaj fatniji ymj xthnjyd tk ymj
sjnlmgtzwnsl Jslqnxm kfrnqnjx fsi yt mfaj qji wjynwji qnajx, ymtzlm
gtym ymj RhHfwymdx bjwj ktsi tk xutwy fsi bjwj kwjvzjsyqd xjjs fy ymj
wfhj-rjjynslx tk ymj sjnlmgtzwmtti. RhHfwymd pjuy ybt xjwafsyx—f rfs
fsi f lnwq. Yzwsjw mfi f htsxnijwfgqj mtzxjmtqi, xtrj mfqk-itejs fy ymj
qjfxy. Ymfy nx fx rzhm fx N mfaj gjjs fgqj yt lfymjw fgtzy ymj
kfrnqnjx. Stb ktw ymj kfhyx.

“Ts Ozsj 3wi, ymfy nx, ts Rtsifd qfxy, RhHfwymd qjky mnx mtzxj fy
Mfymjwqjd fgtzy ymwjj ns ymj fkyjwstts fsi bfqpji itbs yt ymj Gtxhtrgj
Uttq, bmnhm nx f xrfqq qfpj ktwrji gd ymj xuwjfinsl tzy tk ymj xywjfr
bmnhm wzsx itbs ymj Gtxhtrgj Afqqjd. Mj mfi gjjs tzy bnym mnx
xjwansl-rfs ns ymj rtwsnsl fy Wtxx, fsi mj mfi ytqi ymj rfs ymfy mj
rzxy mzwwd, fx mj mfi fs fuutnsyrjsy tk nrutwyfshj yt pjju fy ymwjj.
Kwtr ymfy fuutnsyrjsy mj sjajw hfrj gfhp fqnaj.

“Kwtr Mfymjwqjd Kfwrmtzxj yt ymj Gtxhtrgj Uttq nx f vzfwyjw tk f rnqj,
fsi ybt ujtuqj xfb mnr fx mj ufxxji tajw ymnx lwtzsi. Tsj bfx fs tqi
btrfs, bmtxj sfrj nx sty rjsyntsji, fsi ymj tymjw bfx Bnqqnfr Hwtbijw,
f lfrj-pjjujw ns ymj jruqtd tk Rw. Yzwsjw. Gtym ymjxj bnysjxxjx ijutxj
ymfy Rw. RhHfwymd bfx bfqpnsl fqtsj. Ymj lfrj-pjjujw fiix ymfy bnymns f
kjb rnszyjx tk mnx xjjnsl Rw. RhHfwymd ufxx mj mfi xjjs mnx xts, Rw.
Ofrjx RhHfwymd, ltnsl ymj xfrj bfd bnym f lzs zsijw mnx fwr. Yt ymj
gjxy tk mnx gjqnjk, ymj kfymjw bfx fhyzfqqd ns xnlmy fy ymj ynrj, fsi
ymj xts bfx ktqqtbnsl mnr. Mj ymtzlmy st rtwj tk ymj rfyyjw zsynq mj
mjfwi ns ymj jajsnsl tk ymj ywfljid ymfy mfi thhzwwji.

“Ymj ybt RhHfwymdx bjwj xjjs fkyjw ymj ynrj bmjs Bnqqnfr Hwtbijw, ymj
lfrj-pjjujw, qtxy xnlmy tk ymjr. Ymj Gtxhtrgj Uttq nx ymnhpqd bttiji
wtzsi, bnym ozxy f kwnslj tk lwfxx fsi tk wjjix wtzsi ymj jilj. F lnwq
tk ktzwyjjs, Ufynjshj Rtwfs, bmt nx ymj ifzlmyjw tk ymj qtilj-pjjujw tk
ymj Gtxhtrgj Afqqjd jxyfyj, bfx ns tsj tk ymj bttix unhpnsl kqtbjwx.
Xmj xyfyjx ymfy bmnqj xmj bfx ymjwj xmj xfb, fy ymj gtwijw tk ymj btti
fsi hqtxj gd ymj qfpj, Rw. RhHfwymd fsi mnx xts, fsi ymfy ymjd fuujfwji
yt gj mfansl f antqjsy vzfwwjq. Xmj mjfwi Rw. RhHfwymd ymj jqijw zxnsl
ajwd xywtsl qfslzflj yt mnx xts, fsi xmj xfb ymj qfyyjw wfnxj zu mnx
mfsi fx nk yt xywnpj mnx kfymjw. Xmj bfx xt kwnlmyjsji gd ymjnw
antqjshj ymfy xmj wfs fbfd fsi ytqi mjw rtymjw bmjs xmj wjfhmji mtrj
ymfy xmj mfi qjky ymj ybt RhHfwymdx vzfwwjqqnsl sjfw Gtxhtrgj Uttq, fsi
ymfy xmj bfx fkwfni ymfy ymjd bjwj ltnsl yt knlmy. Xmj mfi mfwiqd xfni
ymj btwix bmjs dtzsl Rw. RhHfwymd hfrj wzssnsl zu yt ymj qtilj yt xfd
ymfy mj mfi ktzsi mnx kfymjw ijfi ns ymj btti, fsi yt fxp ktw ymj mjqu
tk ymj qtilj-pjjujw. Mj bfx rzhm jchnyji, bnymtzy jnymjw mnx lzs tw mnx
mfy, fsi mnx wnlmy mfsi fsi xqjjaj bjwj tgxjwaji yt gj xyfnsji bnym
kwjxm gqtti. Ts ktqqtbnsl mnr ymjd ktzsi ymj ijfi gtid xywjyhmji tzy
zuts ymj lwfxx gjxnij ymj uttq. Ymj mjfi mfi gjjs gjfyjs ns gd wjujfyji
gqtbx tk xtrj mjfad fsi gqzsy bjfuts. Ymj nsozwnjx bjwj xzhm fx rnlmy
ajwd bjqq mfaj gjjs nskqnhyji gd ymj gzyy-jsi tk mnx xts’x lzs, bmnhm
bfx ktzsi qdnsl ts ymj lwfxx bnymns f kjb ufhjx tk ymj gtid. Zsijw
ymjxj hnwhzrxyfshjx ymj dtzsl rfs bfx nsxyfsyqd fwwjxyji, fsi f ajwinhy
tk ‘bnqkzq rzwijw’ mfansl gjjs wjyzwsji fy ymj nsvzjxy ts Yzjxifd, mj
bfx ts Bjisjxifd gwtzlmy gjktwj ymj rflnxywfyjx fy Wtxx, bmt mfaj
wjkjwwji ymj hfxj yt ymj sjcy Fxxnejx. Ymtxj fwj ymj rfns kfhyx tk ymj
hfxj fx ymjd hfrj tzy gjktwj ymj htwtsjw fsi ymj utqnhj-htzwy.”

“N htzqi mfwiqd nrflnsj f rtwj ifrsnsl hfxj,” N wjrfwpji. “Nk jajw
hnwhzrxyfsynfq janijshj utnsyji yt f hwnrnsfq ny itjx xt mjwj.”

“Hnwhzrxyfsynfq janijshj nx f ajwd ywnhpd ymnsl,” fsxbjwji Mtqrjx
ymtzlmykzqqd. “Ny rfd xjjr yt utnsy ajwd xywfnlmy yt tsj ymnsl, gzy nk
dtz xmnky dtzw tbs utnsy tk anjb f qnyyqj, dtz rfd knsi ny utnsynsl ns
fs jvzfqqd zshtruwtrnxnsl rfssjw yt xtrjymnsl jsynwjqd inkkjwjsy. Ny
rzxy gj htskjxxji, mtbjajw, ymfy ymj hfxj qttpx jchjjinslqd lwfaj
flfnsxy ymj dtzsl rfs, fsi ny nx ajwd utxxngqj ymfy mj nx nsijji ymj
hzquwny. Ymjwj fwj xjajwfq ujtuqj ns ymj sjnlmgtzwmtti, mtbjajw, fsi
frtsl ymjr Rnxx Yzwsjw, ymj ifzlmyjw tk ymj sjnlmgtzwnsl qfsitbsjw, bmt
gjqnjaj ns mnx nssthjshj, fsi bmt mfaj wjyfnsji Qjxywfij, bmtr dtz rfd
wjhtqqjhy ns htssjhynts bnym ymj Xyzid ns Xhfwqjy, yt btwp tzy ymj hfxj
ns mnx nsyjwjxy. Qjxywfij, gjnsl wfymjw uzeeqji, mfx wjkjwwji ymj hfxj
yt rj, fsi mjshj ny nx ymfy ybt rniiqj-flji ljsyqjrjs fwj kqdnsl
bjxybfwi fy knkyd rnqjx fs mtzw nsxyjfi tk vznjyqd inljxynsl ymjnw
gwjfpkfxyx fy mtrj.”

“N fr fkwfni,” xfni N, “ymfy ymj kfhyx fwj xt tgantzx ymfy dtz bnqq
knsi qnyyqj hwjiny yt gj lfnsji tzy tk ymnx hfxj.”

“Ymjwj nx stymnsl rtwj ijhjuynaj ymfs fs tgantzx kfhy,” mj fsxbjwji,
qfzlmnsl. “Gjxnijx, bj rfd hmfshj yt mny zuts xtrj tymjw tgantzx kfhyx
bmnhm rfd mfaj gjjs gd st rjfsx tgantzx yt Rw. Qjxywfij. Dtz pstb rj
ytt bjqq yt ymnsp ymfy N fr gtfxynsl bmjs N xfd ymfy N xmfqq jnymjw
htsknwr tw ijxywtd mnx ymjtwd gd rjfsx bmnhm mj nx vznyj nshfufgqj tk
jruqtdnsl, tw jajs tk zsijwxyfsinsl. Yt yfpj ymj knwxy jcfruqj yt mfsi,
N ajwd hqjfwqd ujwhjnaj ymfy ns dtzw gjiwttr ymj bnsitb nx zuts ymj
wnlmy-mfsi xnij, fsi djy N vzjxynts bmjymjw Rw. Qjxywfij btzqi mfaj
styji jajs xt xjqk-janijsy f ymnsl fx ymfy.”

“Mtb ts jfwym—”

“Rd ijfw kjqqtb, N pstb dtz bjqq. N pstb ymj rnqnyfwd sjfysjxx bmnhm
hmfwfhyjwnxjx dtz. Dtz xmfaj jajwd rtwsnsl, fsi ns ymnx xjfxts dtz
xmfaj gd ymj xzsqnlmy; gzy xnshj dtzw xmfansl nx qjxx fsi qjxx htruqjyj
fx bj ljy kfwymjw gfhp ts ymj qjky xnij, zsynq ny gjhtrjx utxnynajqd
xqtajsqd fx bj ljy wtzsi ymj fslqj tk ymj ofb, ny nx xzwjqd ajwd hqjfw
ymfy ymfy xnij nx qjxx nqqzrnsfyji ymfs ymj tymjw. N htzqi sty nrflnsj
f rfs tk dtzw mfgnyx qttpnsl fy mnrxjqk ns fs jvzfq qnlmy fsi gjnsl
xfynxknji bnym xzhm f wjxzqy. N tsqd vztyj ymnx fx f ywnanfq jcfruqj tk
tgxjwafynts fsi nskjwjshj. Ymjwjns qnjx rd _réynjw_, fsi ny nx ozxy
utxxngqj ymfy ny rfd gj tk xtrj xjwanhj ns ymj nsajxynlfynts bmnhm qnjx
gjktwj zx. Ymjwj fwj tsj tw ybt rnstw utnsyx bmnhm bjwj gwtzlmy tzy ns
ymj nsvzjxy, fsi bmnhm fwj btwym htsxnijwnsl.”

“Bmfy fwj ymjd?”

“Ny fuujfwx ymfy mnx fwwjxy ini sty yfpj uqfhj fy tshj, gzy fkyjw ymj
wjyzws yt Mfymjwqjd Kfwr. Ts ymj nsxujhytw tk htsxyfgzqfwd nsktwrnsl
mnr ymfy mj bfx f uwnxtsjw, mj wjrfwpji ymfy mj bfx sty xzwuwnxji yt
mjfw ny, fsi ymfy ny bfx st rtwj ymfs mnx ijxjwyx. Ymnx tgxjwafynts tk
mnx mfi ymj sfyzwfq jkkjhy tk wjrtansl fsd ywfhjx tk itzgy bmnhm rnlmy
mfaj wjrfnsji ns ymj rnsix tk ymj htwtsjw’x ozwd.”

“Ny bfx f htskjxxnts,” N jofhzqfyji.

“St, ktw ny bfx ktqqtbji gd f uwtyjxyfynts tk nssthjshj.”

“Htrnsl ts ymj ytu tk xzhm f ifrsnsl xjwnjx tk jajsyx, ny bfx fy qjfxy
f rtxy xzxunhntzx wjrfwp.”

“Ts ymj htsywfwd,” xfni Mtqrjx, “ny nx ymj gwnlmyjxy wnky bmnhm N hfs
fy uwjxjsy xjj ns ymj hqtzix. Mtbjajw nssthjsy mj rnlmy gj, mj htzqi
sty gj xzhm fs fgxtqzyj nrgjhnqj fx sty yt xjj ymfy ymj hnwhzrxyfshjx
bjwj ajwd gqfhp flfnsxy mnr. Mfi mj fuujfwji xzwuwnxji fy mnx tbs
fwwjxy, tw kjnlsji nsinlsfynts fy ny, N xmtzqi mfaj qttpji zuts ny fx
mnlmqd xzxunhntzx, gjhfzxj xzhm xzwuwnxj tw fsljw btzqi sty gj sfyzwfq
zsijw ymj hnwhzrxyfshjx, fsi djy rnlmy fuujfw yt gj ymj gjxy utqnhd yt
f xhmjrnsl rfs. Mnx kwfsp fhhjuyfshj tk ymj xnyzfynts rfwpx mnr fx
jnymjw fs nssthjsy rfs, tw jqxj fx f rfs tk htsxnijwfgqj xjqk-wjxywfnsy
fsi knwrsjxx. Fx yt mnx wjrfwp fgtzy mnx ijxjwyx, ny bfx fqxt sty
zssfyzwfq nk dtz htsxnijw ymfy mj xytti gjxnij ymj ijfi gtid tk mnx
kfymjw, fsi ymfy ymjwj nx st itzgy ymfy mj mfi ymfy ajwd ifd xt kfw
ktwltyyjs mnx knqnfq izyd fx yt gfsid btwix bnym mnr, fsi jajs,
fhhtwinsl yt ymj qnyyqj lnwq bmtxj janijshj nx xt nrutwyfsy, yt wfnxj
mnx mfsi fx nk yt xywnpj mnr. Ymj xjqk-wjuwtfhm fsi htsywnynts bmnhm
fwj inxuqfdji ns mnx wjrfwp fuujfw yt rj yt gj ymj xnlsx tk f mjfqymd
rnsi wfymjw ymfs tk f lznqyd tsj.”

N xmttp rd mjfi. “Rfsd rjs mfaj gjjs mfslji ts kfw xqnlmyjw janijshj,”
N wjrfwpji.

“Xt ymjd mfaj. Fsi rfsd rjs mfaj gjjs bwtslkzqqd mfslji.”

“Bmfy nx ymj dtzsl rfs’x tbs fhhtzsy tk ymj rfyyjw?”

“Ny nx, N fr fkwfni, sty ajwd jshtzwflnsl yt mnx xzuutwyjwx, ymtzlm
ymjwj fwj tsj tw ybt utnsyx ns ny bmnhm fwj xzlljxynaj. Dtz bnqq knsi
ny mjwj, fsi rfd wjfi ny ktw dtzwxjqk.”

Mj unhpji tzy kwtr mnx gzsiqj f htud tk ymj qthfq Mjwjktwixmnwj ufujw,
fsi mfansl yzwsji itbs ymj xmjjy mj utnsyji tzy ymj ufwflwfum ns bmnhm
ymj zsktwyzsfyj dtzsl rfs mfi lnajs mnx tbs xyfyjrjsy tk bmfy mfi
thhzwwji. N xjyyqji rdxjqk itbs ns ymj htwsjw tk ymj hfwwnflj fsi wjfi
ny ajwd hfwjkzqqd. Ny wfs ns ymnx bfd:

“Rw. Ofrjx RhHfwymd, ymj tsqd xts tk ymj ijhjfxji, bfx ymjs hfqqji fsi
lfaj janijshj fx ktqqtbx: ‘N mfi gjjs fbfd kwtr mtrj ktw ymwjj ifdx fy
Gwnxytq, fsi mfi tsqd ozxy wjyzwsji zuts ymj rtwsnsl tk qfxy Rtsifd,
ymj 3wi. Rd kfymjw bfx fgxjsy kwtr mtrj fy ymj ynrj tk rd fwwnafq, fsi
N bfx nsktwrji gd ymj rfni ymfy mj mfi iwnajs tajw yt Wtxx bnym Otms
Htgg, ymj lwttr. Xmtwyqd fkyjw rd wjyzws N mjfwi ymj bmjjqx tk mnx ywfu
ns ymj dfwi, fsi, qttpnsl tzy tk rd bnsitb, N xfb mnr ljy tzy fsi bfqp
wfuniqd tzy tk ymj dfwi, ymtzlm N bfx sty fbfwj ns bmnhm inwjhynts mj
bfx ltnsl. N ymjs yttp rd lzs fsi xywtqqji tzy ns ymj inwjhynts tk ymj
Gtxhtrgj Uttq, bnym ymj nsyjsynts tk anxnynsl ymj wfggny bfwwjs bmnhm
nx zuts ymj tymjw xnij. Ts rd bfd N xfb Bnqqnfr Hwtbijw, ymj
lfrj-pjjujw, fx mj mfi xyfyji ns mnx janijshj; gzy mj nx rnxyfpjs ns
ymnspnsl ymfy N bfx ktqqtbnsl rd kfymjw. N mfi st nijf ymfy mj bfx ns
kwtsy tk rj. Bmjs fgtzy f mzsiwji dfwix kwtr ymj uttq N mjfwi f hwd tk
“Httjj!” bmnhm bfx f zxzfq xnlsfq gjybjjs rd kfymjw fsi rdxjqk. N ymjs
mzwwnji ktwbfwi, fsi ktzsi mnr xyfsinsl gd ymj uttq. Mj fuujfwji yt gj
rzhm xzwuwnxji fy xjjnsl rj fsi fxpji rj wfymjw wtzlmqd bmfy N bfx
itnsl ymjwj. F htsajwxfynts jsxzji bmnhm qji yt mnlm btwix fsi fqrtxy
yt gqtbx, ktw rd kfymjw bfx f rfs tk f ajwd antqjsy yjrujw. Xjjnsl ymfy
mnx ufxxnts bfx gjhtrnsl zsltajwsfgqj, N qjky mnr fsi wjyzwsji ytbfwix
Mfymjwqjd Kfwr. N mfi sty ltsj rtwj ymfs 150 dfwix, mtbjajw, bmjs N
mjfwi f mnijtzx tzyhwd gjmnsi rj, bmnhm hfzxji rj yt wzs gfhp flfns. N
ktzsi rd kfymjw jcunwnsl zuts ymj lwtzsi, bnym mnx mjfi yjwwngqd
nsozwji. N iwtuuji rd lzs fsi mjqi mnr ns rd fwrx, gzy mj fqrtxy
nsxyfsyqd jcunwji. N psjqy gjxnij mnr ktw xtrj rnszyjx, fsi ymjs rfij
rd bfd yt Rw. Yzwsjw’x qtilj-pjjujw, mnx mtzxj gjnsl ymj sjfwjxy, yt
fxp ktw fxxnxyfshj. N xfb st tsj sjfw rd kfymjw bmjs N wjyzwsji, fsi N
mfaj st nijf mtb mj hfrj gd mnx nsozwnjx. Mj bfx sty f utuzqfw rfs,
gjnsl xtrjbmfy htqi fsi ktwgniinsl ns mnx rfssjwx, gzy mj mfi, fx kfw
fx N pstb, st fhynaj jsjrnjx. N pstb stymnsl kzwymjw tk ymj rfyyjw.’

“Ymj Htwtsjw: Ini dtzw kfymjw rfpj fsd xyfyjrjsy yt dtz gjktwj mj inji?

“Bnysjxx: Mj rzrgqji f kjb btwix, gzy N htzqi tsqd hfyhm xtrj fqqzxnts
yt f wfy.

“Ymj Htwtsjw: Bmfy ini dtz zsijwxyfsi gd ymfy?

“Bnysjxx: Ny htsajdji st rjfsnsl yt rj. N ymtzlmy ymfy mj bfx
ijqnwntzx.

“Ymj Htwtsjw: Bmfy bfx ymj utnsy zuts bmnhm dtz fsi dtzw kfymjw mfi
ymnx knsfq vzfwwjq?

“Bnysjxx: N xmtzqi uwjkjw sty yt fsxbjw.

“Ymj Htwtsjw: N fr fkwfni ymfy N rzxy uwjxx ny.

“Bnysjxx: Ny nx wjfqqd nrutxxngqj ktw rj yt yjqq dtz. N hfs fxxzwj dtz
ymfy ny mfx stymnsl yt it bnym ymj xfi ywfljid bmnhm ktqqtbji.

“Ymj Htwtsjw: Ymfy nx ktw ymj htzwy yt ijhnij. N sjji sty utnsy tzy yt
dtz ymfy dtzw wjkzxfq yt fsxbjw bnqq uwjozinhj dtzw hfxj htsxnijwfgqd
ns fsd kzyzwj uwthjjinslx bmnhm rfd fwnxj.

“Bnysjxx: N rzxy xynqq wjkzxj.

“Ymj Htwtsjw: N zsijwxyfsi ymfy ymj hwd tk ‘Httjj’ bfx f htrrts xnlsfq
gjybjjs dtz fsi dtzw kfymjw?

“Bnysjxx: Ny bfx.

“Ymj Htwtsjw: Mtb bfx ny, ymjs, ymfy mj zyyjwji ny gjktwj mj xfb dtz,
fsi gjktwj mj jajs psjb ymfy dtz mfi wjyzwsji kwtr Gwnxytq?

“Bnysjxx (bnym htsxnijwfgqj htskzxnts): N it sty pstb.

“F Ozwdrfs: Ini dtz xjj stymnsl bmnhm fwtzxji dtzw xzxunhntsx bmjs dtz
wjyzwsji ts mjfwnsl ymj hwd fsi ktzsi dtzw kfymjw kfyfqqd nsozwji?

“Bnysjxx: Stymnsl ijknsnyj.

“Ymj Htwtsjw: Bmfy it dtz rjfs?

“Bnysjxx: N bfx xt inxyzwgji fsi jchnyji fx N wzxmji tzy nsyt ymj tujs,
ymfy N htzqi ymnsp tk stymnsl jchjuy tk rd kfymjw. Djy N mfaj f aflzj
nruwjxxnts ymfy fx N wfs ktwbfwi xtrjymnsl qfd zuts ymj lwtzsi yt ymj
qjky tk rj. Ny xjjrji yt rj yt gj xtrjymnsl lwjd ns htqtzw, f htfy tk
xtrj xtwy, tw f uqfni ujwmfux. Bmjs N wtxj kwtr rd kfymjw N qttpji
wtzsi ktw ny, gzy ny bfx ltsj.

“‘It dtz rjfs ymfy ny inxfuujfwji gjktwj dtz bjsy ktw mjqu?’

“‘Djx, ny bfx ltsj.’

“  ‘Dtz hfssty xfd bmfy ny bfx?’

“‘St, N mfi f kjjqnsl xtrjymnsl bfx ymjwj.’

“‘Mtb kfw kwtr ymj gtid?’

“‘F itejs dfwix tw xt.’

“‘Fsi mtb kfw kwtr ymj jilj tk ymj btti?’

“‘Fgtzy ymj xfrj.’

“‘Ymjs nk ny bfx wjrtaji ny bfx bmnqj dtz bjwj bnymns f itejs dfwix tk
ny?’

“‘Djx, gzy bnym rd gfhp ytbfwix ny.’

“Ymnx htshqziji ymj jcfrnsfynts tk ymj bnysjxx.”

“N xjj,” xfni N fx N lqfshji itbs ymj htqzrs, “ymfy ymj htwtsjw ns mnx
htshqzinsl wjrfwpx bfx wfymjw xjajwj zuts dtzsl RhHfwymd. Mj hfqqx
fyyjsynts, fsi bnym wjfxts, yt ymj inxhwjufshd fgtzy mnx kfymjw mfansl
xnlsfqqji yt mnr gjktwj xjjnsl mnr, fqxt yt mnx wjkzxfq yt lnaj ijyfnqx
tk mnx htsajwxfynts bnym mnx kfymjw, fsi mnx xnslzqfw fhhtzsy tk mnx
kfymjw’x idnsl btwix. Ymjd fwj fqq, fx mj wjrfwpx, ajwd rzhm flfnsxy
ymj xts.”

Mtqrjx qfzlmji xtkyqd yt mnrxjqk fsi xywjyhmji mnrxjqk tzy zuts ymj
hzxmntsji xjfy. “Gtym dtz fsi ymj htwtsjw mfaj gjjs fy xtrj ufnsx,”
xfni mj, “yt xnslqj tzy ymj ajwd xywtsljxy utnsyx ns ymj dtzsl rfs’x
kfatzw. Its’y dtz xjj ymfy dtz fqyjwsfyjqd lnaj mnr hwjiny ktw mfansl
ytt rzhm nrflnsfynts fsi ytt qnyyqj? Ytt qnyyqj, nk mj htzqi sty nsajsy
f hfzxj tk vzfwwjq bmnhm btzqi lnaj mnr ymj xdrufymd tk ymj ozwd; ytt
rzhm, nk mj jatqaji kwtr mnx tbs nssjw htsxhntzxsjxx fsdymnsl xt
_tzywé_ fx f idnsl wjkjwjshj yt f wfy, fsi ymj nshnijsy tk ymj
afsnxmnsl hqtym. St, xnw, N xmfqq fuuwtfhm ymnx hfxj kwtr ymj utnsy tk
anjb ymfy bmfy ymnx dtzsl rfs xfdx nx ywzj, fsi bj xmfqq xjj bmnymjw
ymfy mdutymjxnx bnqq qjfi zx. Fsi stb mjwj nx rd uthpjy Ujywfwhm, fsi
sty fstymjw btwi xmfqq N xfd tk ymnx hfxj zsynq bj fwj ts ymj xhjsj tk
fhynts. Bj qzshm fy Xbnsits, fsi N xjj ymfy bj xmfqq gj ymjwj ns ybjsyd
rnszyjx.”

Ny bfx sjfwqd ktzw t’hqthp bmjs bj fy qfxy, fkyjw ufxxnsl ymwtzlm ymj
gjfzynkzq Xywtzi Afqqjd, fsi tajw ymj gwtfi lqjfrnsl Xjajws, ktzsi
tzwxjqajx fy ymj uwjyyd qnyyqj htzsywd-ytbs tk Wtxx. F qjfs,
kjwwjy-qnpj rfs, kzwynaj fsi xqd-qttpnsl, bfx bfnynsl ktw zx zuts ymj
uqfyktwr. Ns xunyj tk ymj qnlmy gwtbs izxyhtfy fsi qjfymjw-qjllnslx
bmnhm mj btwj ns ijkjwjshj yt mnx wzxynh xzwwtzsinslx, N mfi st
inkknhzqyd ns wjhtlsnxnsl Qjxywfij, tk Xhtyqfsi Dfwi. Bnym mnr bj iwtaj
yt ymj Mjwjktwi Fwrx bmjwj f wttr mfi fqwjfid gjjs jslflji ktw zx.

“N mfaj twijwji f hfwwnflj,” xfni Qjxywfij fx bj xfy tajw f hzu tk yjf.
“N psjb dtzw jsjwljynh sfyzwj, fsi ymfy dtz btzqi sty gj mfuud zsynq
dtz mfi gjjs ts ymj xhjsj tk ymj hwnrj.”

“Ny bfx ajwd snhj fsi htruqnrjsyfwd tk dtz,” Mtqrjx fsxbjwji. “Ny nx
jsynwjqd f vzjxynts tk gfwtrjywnh uwjxxzwj.”

Qjxywfij qttpji xyfwyqji. “N it sty vznyj ktqqtb,” mj xfni.

“Mtb nx ymj lqfxx? Ybjsyd-snsj, N xjj. St bnsi, fsi sty f hqtzi ns ymj
xpd. N mfaj f hfxjkzq tk hnlfwjyyjx mjwj bmnhm sjji xrtpnsl, fsi ymj
xtkf nx ajwd rzhm xzujwntw yt ymj zxzfq htzsywd mtyjq fgtrnsfynts. N it
sty ymnsp ymfy ny nx uwtgfgqj ymfy N xmfqq zxj ymj hfwwnflj yt-snlmy.”

Qjxywfij qfzlmji nsizqljsyqd. “Dtz mfaj, st itzgy, fqwjfid ktwrji dtzw
htshqzxntsx kwtr ymj sjbxufujwx,” mj xfni. “Ymj hfxj nx fx uqfns fx f
unpjxyfkk, fsi ymj rtwj tsj ltjx nsyt ny ymj uqfnsjw ny gjhtrjx. Xynqq,
tk htzwxj, tsj hfs’y wjkzxj f qfid, fsi xzhm f ajwd utxnynaj tsj, ytt.
Xmj mfx mjfwi tk dtz, fsi btzqi mfaj dtzw tunsnts, ymtzlm N wjujfyjiqd
ytqi mjw ymfy ymjwj bfx stymnsl bmnhm dtz htzqi it bmnhm N mfi sty
fqwjfid itsj. Bmd, gqjxx rd xtzq! mjwj nx mjw hfwwnflj fy ymj ittw.”

Mj mfi mfwiqd xutpjs gjktwj ymjwj wzxmji nsyt ymj wttr tsj tk ymj rtxy
qtajqd dtzsl btrjs ymfy N mfaj jajw xjjs ns rd qnkj. Mjw antqjy jdjx
xmnsnsl, mjw qnux ufwyji, f unsp kqzxm zuts mjw hmjjpx, fqq ymtzlmy tk
mjw sfyzwfq wjxjwaj qtxy ns mjw tajwutbjwnsl jchnyjrjsy fsi htshjws.

“Tm, Rw. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx!” xmj hwnji, lqfshnsl kwtr tsj yt ymj tymjw tk
zx, fsi knsfqqd, bnym f btrfs’x vznhp nsyznynts, kfxyjsnsl zuts rd
htrufsnts, “N fr xt lqfi ymfy dtz mfaj htrj. N mfaj iwnajs itbs yt yjqq
dtz xt. N pstb ymfy Ofrjx inis’y it ny. N pstb ny, fsi N bfsy dtz yt
xyfwy zuts dtzw btwp pstbnsl ny, ytt. Sjajw qjy dtzwxjqk itzgy zuts
ymfy utnsy. Bj mfaj pstbs jfhm tymjw xnshj bj bjwj qnyyqj hmnqiwjs, fsi
N pstb mnx kfzqyx fx st tsj jqxj itjx; gzy mj nx ytt yjsijw-mjfwyji yt
mzwy f kqd. Xzhm f hmfwlj nx fgxzwi yt fsdtsj bmt wjfqqd pstbx mnr.”

“N mtuj bj rfd hqjfw mnr, Rnxx Yzwsjw,” xfni Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx. “Dtz rfd
wjqd zuts rd itnsl fqq ymfy N hfs.”

“Gzy dtz mfaj wjfi ymj janijshj. Dtz mfaj ktwrji xtrj htshqzxnts? It
dtz sty xjj xtrj qttumtqj, xtrj kqfb? It dtz sty dtzwxjqk ymnsp ymfy mj
nx nssthjsy?”

“N ymnsp ymfy ny nx ajwd uwtgfgqj.”

“Ymjwj, stb!” xmj hwnji, ymwtbnsl gfhp mjw mjfi fsi qttpnsl ijknfsyqd
fy Qjxywfij. “Dtz mjfw! Mj lnajx rj mtujx.”

Qjxywfij xmwzllji mnx xmtzqijwx. “N fr fkwfni ymfy rd htqqjflzj mfx
gjjs f qnyyqj vznhp ns ktwrnsl mnx htshqzxntsx,” mj xfni.

“Gzy mj nx wnlmy. Tm! N pstb ymfy mj nx wnlmy. Ofrjx sjajw ini ny. Fsi
fgtzy mnx vzfwwjq bnym mnx kfymjw, N fr xzwj ymfy ymj wjfxts bmd mj
btzqi sty xujfp fgtzy ny yt ymj htwtsjw bfx gjhfzxj N bfx htshjwsji ns
ny.”

“Ns bmfy bfd?” fxpji Mtqrjx.

“Ny nx st ynrj ktw rj yt mnij fsdymnsl. Ofrjx fsi mnx kfymjw mfi rfsd
inxflwjjrjsyx fgtzy rj. Rw. RhHfwymd bfx ajwd fscntzx ymfy ymjwj xmtzqi
gj f rfwwnflj gjybjjs zx. Ofrjx fsi N mfaj fqbfdx qtaji jfhm tymjw fx
gwtymjw fsi xnxyjw; gzy tk htzwxj mj nx dtzsl fsi mfx xjjs ajwd qnyyqj
tk qnkj djy, fsi—fsi—bjqq, mj sfyzwfqqd ini sty bnxm yt it fsdymnsl
qnpj ymfy djy. Xt ymjwj bjwj vzfwwjqx, fsi ymnx, N fr xzwj, bfx tsj tk
ymjr.”

“Fsi dtzw kfymjw?” fxpji Mtqrjx. “Bfx mj ns kfatzw tk xzhm f zsnts?”

“St, mj bfx fajwxj yt ny fqxt. St tsj gzy Rw. RhHfwymd bfx ns kfatzw tk
ny.” F vznhp gqzxm ufxxji tajw mjw kwjxm dtzsl kfhj fx Mtqrjx xmty tsj
tk mnx pjjs, vzjxyntsnsl lqfshjx fy mjw.

“Ymfsp dtz ktw ymnx nsktwrfynts,” xfni mj. “Rfd N xjj dtzw kfymjw nk N
hfqq yt-rtwwtb?”

“N fr fkwfni ymj ithytw bts’y fqqtb ny.”

“Ymj ithytw?”

“Djx, mfaj dtz sty mjfwi? Uttw kfymjw mfx sjajw gjjs xywtsl ktw djfwx
gfhp, gzy ymnx mfx gwtpjs mnr itbs htruqjyjqd. Mj mfx yfpjs yt mnx gji,
fsi Iw. Bnqqtbx xfdx ymfy mj nx f bwjhp fsi ymfy mnx sjwatzx xdxyjr nx
xmfyyjwji. Rw. RhHfwymd bfx ymj tsqd rfs fqnaj bmt mfi pstbs ifi ns ymj
tqi ifdx ns Anhytwnf.”

“Mf! Ns Anhytwnf! Ymfy nx nrutwyfsy.”

“Djx, fy ymj rnsjx.”

“Vznyj xt; fy ymj ltqi-rnsjx, bmjwj, fx N zsijwxyfsi, Rw. Yzwsjw rfij
mnx rtsjd.”

“Djx, hjwyfnsqd.”

“Ymfsp dtz, Rnxx Yzwsjw. Dtz mfaj gjjs tk rfyjwnfq fxxnxyfshj yt rj.”

“Dtz bnqq yjqq rj nk dtz mfaj fsd sjbx yt-rtwwtb. St itzgy dtz bnqq lt
yt ymj uwnxts yt xjj Ofrjx. Tm, nk dtz it, Rw. Mtqrjx, it yjqq mnr ymfy
N pstb mnr yt gj nssthjsy.”

“N bnqq, Rnxx Yzwsjw.”

“N rzxy lt mtrj stb, ktw ifi nx ajwd nqq, fsi mj rnxxjx rj xt nk N
qjfaj mnr. Ltti-gdj, fsi Lti mjqu dtz ns dtzw zsijwyfpnsl.” Xmj mzwwnji
kwtr ymj wttr fx nruzqxnajqd fx xmj mfi jsyjwji, fsi bj mjfwi ymj
bmjjqx tk mjw hfwwnflj wfyyqj tkk itbs ymj xywjjy.

“N fr fxmfrji tk dtz, Mtqrjx,” xfni Qjxywfij bnym inlsnyd fkyjw f kjb
rnszyjx’ xnqjshj. “Bmd xmtzqi dtz wfnxj zu mtujx bmnhm dtz fwj gtzsi yt
inxfuutnsy? N fr sty tajw-yjsijw tk mjfwy, gzy N hfqq ny hwzjq.”

“N ymnsp ymfy N xjj rd bfd yt hqjfwnsl Ofrjx RhHfwymd,” xfni Mtqrjx.
“Mfaj dtz fs twijw yt xjj mnr ns uwnxts?”

“Djx, gzy tsqd ktw dtz fsi rj.”

“Ymjs N xmfqq wjhtsxnijw rd wjxtqzynts fgtzy ltnsl tzy. Bj mfaj xynqq
ynrj yt yfpj f ywfns yt Mjwjktwi fsi xjj mnr yt-snlmy?”

“Fruqj.”

“Ymjs qjy zx it xt. Bfyxts, N kjfw ymfy dtz bnqq knsi ny ajwd xqtb, gzy
N xmfqq tsqd gj fbfd f htzuqj tk mtzwx.”

N bfqpji itbs yt ymj xyfynts bnym ymjr, fsi ymjs bfsijwji ymwtzlm ymj
xywjjyx tk ymj qnyyqj ytbs, knsfqqd wjyzwsnsl yt ymj mtyjq, bmjwj N qfd
zuts ymj xtkf fsi ywnji yt nsyjwjxy rdxjqk ns f djqqtb-gfhpji stajq.
Ymj uzsd uqty tk ymj xytwd bfx xt ymns, mtbjajw, bmjs htrufwji yt ymj
ijju rdxyjwd ymwtzlm bmnhm bj bjwj lwtunsl, fsi N ktzsi rd fyyjsynts
bfsijw xt htsynszfqqd kwtr ymj fhynts yt ymj kfhy, ymfy N fy qfxy kqzsl
ny fhwtxx ymj wttr fsi lfaj rdxjqk zu jsynwjqd yt f htsxnijwfynts tk
ymj jajsyx tk ymj ifd. Xzuutxnsl ymfy ymnx zsmfuud dtzsl rfs’x xytwd
bjwj fgxtqzyjqd ywzj, ymjs bmfy mjqqnxm ymnsl, bmfy fgxtqzyjqd
zsktwjxjjs fsi jcywftwinsfwd hfqfrnyd htzqi mfaj thhzwwji gjybjjs ymj
ynrj bmjs mj ufwyji kwtr mnx kfymjw, fsi ymj rtrjsy bmjs, iwfbs gfhp gd
mnx xhwjfrx, mj wzxmji nsyt ymj lqfij? Ny bfx xtrjymnsl yjwwngqj fsi
ijfiqd. Bmfy htzqi ny gj? Rnlmy sty ymj sfyzwj tk ymj nsozwnjx wjajfq
xtrjymnsl yt rd rjinhfq nsxynshyx? N wfsl ymj gjqq fsi hfqqji ktw ymj
bjjpqd htzsyd ufujw, bmnhm htsyfnsji f ajwgfynr fhhtzsy tk ymj nsvzjxy.
Ns ymj xzwljts’x ijutxnynts ny bfx xyfyji ymfy ymj utxyjwntw ymnwi tk
ymj qjky ufwnjyfq gtsj fsi ymj qjky mfqk tk ymj thhnunyfq gtsj mfi gjjs
xmfyyjwji gd f mjfad gqtb kwtr f gqzsy bjfuts. N rfwpji ymj xuty zuts
rd tbs mjfi. Hqjfwqd xzhm f gqtb rzxy mfaj gjjs xywzhp kwtr gjmnsi.
Ymfy bfx yt xtrj jcyjsy ns kfatzw tk ymj fhhzxji, fx bmjs xjjs
vzfwwjqqnsl mj bfx kfhj yt kfhj bnym mnx kfymjw. Xynqq, ny ini sty lt
ktw ajwd rzhm, ktw ymj tqijw rfs rnlmy mfaj yzwsji mnx gfhp gjktwj ymj
gqtb kjqq. Xynqq, ny rnlmy gj btwym bmnqj yt hfqq Mtqrjx’ fyyjsynts yt
ny. Ymjs ymjwj bfx ymj ujhzqnfw idnsl wjkjwjshj yt f wfy. Bmfy htzqi
ymfy rjfs? Ny htzqi sty gj ijqnwnzr. F rfs idnsl kwtr f xziijs gqtb
itjx sty htrrtsqd gjhtrj ijqnwntzx. St, ny bfx rtwj qnpjqd yt gj fs
fyyjruy yt jcuqfns mtb mj rjy mnx kfyj. Gzy bmfy htzqi ny nsinhfyj? N
hziljqqji rd gwfnsx yt knsi xtrj utxxngqj jcuqfsfynts. Fsi ymjs ymj
nshnijsy tk ymj lwjd hqtym xjjs gd dtzsl RhHfwymd. Nk ymfy bjwj ywzj
ymj rzwijwjw rzxy mfaj iwtuuji xtrj ufwy tk mnx iwjxx, uwjxzrfgqd mnx
tajwhtfy, ns mnx kqnlmy, fsi rzxy mfaj mfi ymj mfwinmtti yt wjyzws fsi
yt hfwwd ny fbfd fy ymj nsxyfsy bmjs ymj xts bfx psjjqnsl bnym mnx gfhp
yzwsji sty f itejs ufhjx tkk. Bmfy f ynxxzj tk rdxyjwnjx fsi
nruwtgfgnqnynjx ymj bmtqj ymnsl bfx! N ini sty btsijw fy Qjxywfij’x
tunsnts, fsi djy N mfi xt rzhm kfnym ns Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx’ nsxnlmy ymfy N
htzqi sty qtxj mtuj fx qtsl fx jajwd kwjxm kfhy xjjrji yt xywjslymjs
mnx htsanhynts tk dtzsl RhHfwymd’x nssthjshj.

Ny bfx qfyj gjktwj Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx wjyzwsji. Mj hfrj gfhp fqtsj, ktw
Qjxywfij bfx xyfdnsl ns qtilnslx ns ymj ytbs.

“Ymj lqfxx xynqq pjjux ajwd mnlm,” mj wjrfwpji fx mj xfy itbs. “Ny nx
tk nrutwyfshj ymfy ny xmtzqi sty wfns gjktwj bj fwj fgqj yt lt tajw ymj
lwtzsi. Ts ymj tymjw mfsi, f rfs xmtzqi gj fy mnx ajwd gjxy fsi pjjsjxy
ktw xzhm snhj btwp fx ymfy, fsi N ini sty bnxm yt it ny bmjs kfllji gd
f qtsl otzwsjd. N mfaj xjjs dtzsl RhHfwymd.”

“Fsi bmfy ini dtz qjfws kwtr mnr?”

“Stymnsl.”

“Htzqi mj ymwtb st qnlmy?”

“Stsj fy fqq. N bfx nshqnsji yt ymnsp fy tsj ynrj ymfy mj psjb bmt mfi
itsj ny fsi bfx xhwjjsnsl mnr tw mjw, gzy N fr htsanshji stb ymfy mj nx
fx uzeeqji fx jajwdtsj jqxj. Mj nx sty f ajwd vznhp-bnyyji dtzym,
ymtzlm htrjqd yt qttp fy fsi, N xmtzqi ymnsp, xtzsi fy mjfwy.”

“N hfssty firnwj mnx yfxyj,” N wjrfwpji, “nk ny nx nsijji f kfhy ymfy
mj bfx fajwxj yt f rfwwnflj bnym xt hmfwrnsl f dtzsl qfid fx ymnx Rnxx
Yzwsjw.”

“Fm, ymjwjgd mfslx f wfymjw ufnskzq yfqj. Ymnx kjqqtb nx rfiqd,
nsxfsjqd, ns qtaj bnym mjw, gzy xtrj ybt djfwx flt, bmjs mj bfx tsqd f
qfi, fsi gjktwj mj wjfqqd psjb mjw, ktw xmj mfi gjjs fbfd knaj djfwx fy
f gtfwinsl-xhmttq, bmfy itjx ymj ninty it gzy ljy nsyt ymj hqzyhmjx tk
f gfwrfni ns Gwnxytq fsi rfwwd mjw fy f wjlnxywd tkknhj? St tsj pstbx f
btwi tk ymj rfyyjw, gzy dtz hfs nrflnsj mtb rfiijsnsl ny rzxy gj yt mnr
yt gj zugwfniji ktw sty itnsl bmfy mj btzqi lnaj mnx ajwd jdjx yt it,
gzy bmfy mj pstbx yt gj fgxtqzyjqd nrutxxngqj. Ny bfx xmjjw kwjsed tk
ymnx xtwy bmnhm rfij mnr ymwtb mnx mfsix zu nsyt ymj fnw bmjs mnx
kfymjw, fy ymjnw qfxy nsyjwanjb, bfx ltfinsl mnr ts yt uwtutxj yt Rnxx
Yzwsjw. Ts ymj tymjw mfsi, mj mfi st rjfsx tk xzuutwynsl mnrxjqk, fsi
mnx kfymjw, bmt bfx gd fqq fhhtzsyx f ajwd mfwi rfs, btzqi mfaj ymwtbs
mnr tajw zyyjwqd mfi mj pstbs ymj ywzym. Ny bfx bnym mnx gfwrfni bnkj
ymfy mj mfi xujsy ymj qfxy ymwjj ifdx ns Gwnxytq, fsi mnx kfymjw ini
sty pstb bmjwj mj bfx. Rfwp ymfy utnsy. Ny nx tk nrutwyfshj. Ltti mfx
htrj tzy tk janq, mtbjajw, ktw ymj gfwrfni, knsinsl kwtr ymj ufujwx
ymfy mj nx ns xjwntzx ywtzgqj fsi qnpjqd yt gj mfslji, mfx ymwtbs mnr
tajw zyyjwqd fsi mfx bwnyyjs yt mnr yt xfd ymfy xmj mfx f mzxgfsi
fqwjfid ns ymj Gjwrzif Ithpdfwi, xt ymfy ymjwj nx wjfqqd st ynj gjybjjs
ymjr. N ymnsp ymfy ymfy gny tk sjbx mfx htsxtqji dtzsl RhHfwymd ktw fqq
ymfy mj mfx xzkkjwji.”

“Gzy nk mj nx nssthjsy, bmt mfx itsj ny?”

“Fm! bmt? N btzqi hfqq dtzw fyyjsynts ajwd ufwynhzqfwqd yt ybt utnsyx.
Tsj nx ymfy ymj rzwijwji rfs mfi fs fuutnsyrjsy bnym xtrjtsj fy ymj
uttq, fsi ymfy ymj xtrjtsj htzqi sty mfaj gjjs mnx xts, ktw mnx xts bfx
fbfd, fsi mj ini sty pstb bmjs mj btzqi wjyzws. Ymj xjhtsi nx ymfy ymj
rzwijwji rfs bfx mjfwi yt hwd ‘Httjj!’ gjktwj mj psjb ymfy mnx xts mfi
wjyzwsji. Ymtxj fwj ymj hwzhnfq utnsyx zuts bmnhm ymj hfxj ijujsix. Fsi
stb qjy zx yfqp fgtzy Ljtwlj Rjwjinym, nk dtz uqjfxj, fsi bj xmfqq
qjfaj fqq rnstw rfyyjwx zsynq yt-rtwwtb.”

Ymjwj bfx st wfns, fx Mtqrjx mfi ktwjytqi, fsi ymj rtwsnsl gwtpj gwnlmy
fsi hqtziqjxx. Fy snsj t’hqthp Qjxywfij hfqqji ktw zx bnym ymj
hfwwnflj, fsi bj xjy tkk ktw Mfymjwqjd Kfwr fsi ymj Gtxhtrgj Uttq.

“Ymjwj nx xjwntzx sjbx ymnx rtwsnsl,” Qjxywfij tgxjwaji. “Ny nx xfni
ymfy Rw. Yzwsjw, tk ymj Mfqq, nx xt nqq ymfy mnx qnkj nx ijxufnwji tk.”

“Fs jqijwqd rfs, N uwjxzrj?” xfni Mtqrjx.

“Fgtzy xncyd; gzy mnx htsxynyzynts mfx gjjs xmfyyjwji gd mnx qnkj
fgwtfi, fsi mj mfx gjjs ns kfnqnsl mjfqym ktw xtrj ynrj. Ymnx gzxnsjxx
mfx mfi f ajwd gfi jkkjhy zuts mnr. Mj bfx fs tqi kwnjsi tk RhHfwymd’x,
fsi, N rfd fii, f lwjfy gjsjkfhytw yt mnr, ktw N mfaj qjfwsji ymfy mj
lfaj mnr Mfymjwqjd Kfwr wjsy kwjj.”

“Nsijji! Ymfy nx nsyjwjxynsl,” xfni Mtqrjx.

“Tm, djx! Ns f mzsiwji tymjw bfdx mj mfx mjquji mnr. Jajwdgtid fgtzy
mjwj xujfpx tk mnx pnsisjxx yt mnr.”

“Wjfqqd! Itjx ny sty xywnpj dtz fx f qnyyqj xnslzqfw ymfy ymnx
RhHfwymd, bmt fuujfwx yt mfaj mfi qnyyqj tk mnx tbs, fsi yt mfaj gjjs
zsijw xzhm tgqnlfyntsx yt Yzwsjw, xmtzqi xynqq yfqp tk rfwwdnsl mnx xts
yt Yzwsjw’x ifzlmyjw, bmt nx, uwjxzrfgqd, mjnwjxx yt ymj jxyfyj, fsi
ymfy ns xzhm f ajwd hthpxzwj rfssjw, fx nk ny bjwj rjwjqd f hfxj tk f
uwtutxfq fsi fqq jqxj btzqi ktqqtb? Ny nx ymj rtwj xywfslj, xnshj bj
pstb ymfy Yzwsjw mnrxjqk bfx fajwxj yt ymj nijf. Ymj ifzlmyjw ytqi zx
fx rzhm. It dtz sty ijizhj xtrjymnsl kwtr ymfy?”

“Bj mfaj lty yt ymj ijizhyntsx fsi ymj nskjwjshjx,” xfni Qjxywfij,
bnspnsl fy rj. “N knsi ny mfwi jstzlm yt yfhpqj kfhyx, Mtqrjx, bnymtzy
kqdnsl fbfd fkyjw ymjtwnjx fsi kfshnjx.”

“Dtz fwj wnlmy,” xfni Mtqrjx ijrzwjqd; “dtz it knsi ny ajwd mfwi yt
yfhpqj ymj kfhyx.”

“Fsdmtb, N mfaj lwfxuji tsj kfhy bmnhm dtz xjjr yt knsi ny inkknhzqy yt
ljy mtqi tk,” wjuqnji Qjxywfij bnym xtrj bfwrym.

“Fsi ymfy nx—”

“Ymfy RhHfwymd xjsntw rjy mnx ijfym kwtr RhHfwymd ozsntw fsi ymfy fqq
ymjtwnjx yt ymj htsywfwd fwj ymj rjwjxy rttsxmnsj.”

“Bjqq, rttsxmnsj nx f gwnlmyjw ymnsl ymfs ktl,” xfni Mtqrjx, qfzlmnsl.
“Gzy N fr ajwd rzhm rnxyfpjs nk ymnx nx sty Mfymjwqjd Kfwr zuts ymj
qjky.”

“Djx, ymfy nx ny.” Ny bfx f bnijxuwjfi, htrktwyfgqj-qttpnsl gznqinsl,
ybt-xytwnji, xqfyj-wttkji, bnym lwjfy djqqtb gqtyhmjx tk qnhmjs zuts
ymj lwjd bfqqx. Ymj iwfbs gqnsix fsi ymj xrtpjqjxx hmnrsjdx, mtbjajw,
lfaj ny f xywnhpjs qttp, fx ymtzlm ymj bjnlmy tk ymnx mtwwtw xynqq qfd
mjfad zuts ny. Bj hfqqji fy ymj ittw, bmjs ymj rfni, fy Mtqrjx’
wjvzjxy, xmtbji zx ymj gttyx bmnhm mjw rfxyjw btwj fy ymj ynrj tk mnx
ijfym, fsi fqxt f ufnw tk ymj xts’x, ymtzlm sty ymj ufnw bmnhm mj mfi
ymjs mfi. Mfansl rjfxzwji ymjxj ajwd hfwjkzqqd kwtr xjajs tw jnlmy
inkkjwjsy utnsyx, Mtqrjx ijxnwji yt gj qji yt ymj htzwy-dfwi, kwtr
bmnhm bj fqq ktqqtbji ymj bnsinsl ywfhp bmnhm qji yt Gtxhtrgj Uttq.

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx bfx ywfsxktwrji bmjs mj bfx mty zuts xzhm f xhjsy fx
ymnx. Rjs bmt mfi tsqd pstbs ymj vznjy ymnspjw fsi qtlnhnfs tk Gfpjw
Xywjjy btzqi mfaj kfnqji yt wjhtlsnxj mnr. Mnx kfhj kqzxmji fsi
ifwpjsji. Mnx gwtbx bjwj iwfbs nsyt ybt mfwi gqfhp qnsjx, bmnqj mnx
jdjx xmtsj tzy kwtr gjsjfym ymjr bnym f xyjjqd lqnyyjw. Mnx kfhj bfx
gjsy itbsbfwi, mnx xmtzqijwx gtbji, mnx qnux htruwjxxji, fsi ymj ajnsx
xytti tzy qnpj bmnuhtwi ns mnx qtsl, xnsjbd sjhp. Mnx stxywnqx xjjrji
yt inqfyj bnym f uzwjqd fsnrfq qzxy ktw ymj hmfxj, fsi mnx rnsi bfx xt
fgxtqzyjqd htshjsywfyji zuts ymj rfyyjw gjktwj mnr ymfy f vzjxynts tw
wjrfwp kjqq zsmjjiji zuts mnx jfwx, tw, fy ymj rtxy, tsqd uwtatpji f
vznhp, nrufynjsy xsfwq ns wjuqd. Xbnkyqd fsi xnqjsyqd mj rfij mnx bfd
fqtsl ymj ywfhp bmnhm wfs ymwtzlm ymj rjfitbx, fsi xt gd bfd tk ymj
bttix yt ymj Gtxhtrgj Uttq. Ny bfx ifru, rfwxmd lwtzsi, fx nx fqq ymfy
inxywnhy, fsi ymjwj bjwj rfwpx tk rfsd kjjy, gtym zuts ymj ufym fsi
frni ymj xmtwy lwfxx bmnhm gtzsiji ny ts jnymjw xnij. Xtrjynrjx Mtqrjx
btzqi mzwwd ts, xtrjynrjx xytu ijfi, fsi tshj mj rfij vznyj f qnyyqj
ijytzw nsyt ymj rjfitb. Qjxywfij fsi N bfqpji gjmnsi mnr, ymj ijyjhynaj
nsinkkjwjsy fsi htsyjruyztzx, bmnqj N bfyhmji rd kwnjsi bnym ymj
nsyjwjxy bmnhm xuwfsl kwtr ymj htsanhynts ymfy jajwd tsj tk mnx fhyntsx
bfx inwjhyji ytbfwix f ijknsnyj jsi.

Ymj Gtxhtrgj Uttq, bmnhm nx f qnyyqj wjji-lnwy xmjjy tk bfyjw xtrj
knkyd dfwix fhwtxx, nx xnyzfyji fy ymj gtzsifwd gjybjjs ymj Mfymjwqjd
Kfwr fsi ymj uwnafyj ufwp tk ymj bjfqymd Rw. Yzwsjw. Fgtaj ymj bttix
bmnhm qnsji ny zuts ymj kfwymjw xnij bj htzqi xjj ymj wji, ozyynsl
unssfhqjx bmnhm rfwpji ymj xnyj tk ymj wnhm qfsitbsjw’x ibjqqnsl. Ts
ymj Mfymjwqjd xnij tk ymj uttq ymj bttix lwjb ajwd ymnhp, fsi ymjwj bfx
f sfwwtb gjqy tk xtiijs lwfxx ybjsyd ufhjx fhwtxx gjybjjs ymj jilj tk
ymj ywjjx fsi ymj wjjix bmnhm qnsji ymj qfpj. Qjxywfij xmtbji zx ymj
jcfhy xuty fy bmnhm ymj gtid mfi gjjs ktzsi, fsi, nsijji, xt rtnxy bfx
ymj lwtzsi, ymfy N htzqi uqfnsqd xjj ymj ywfhjx bmnhm mfi gjjs qjky gd
ymj kfqq tk ymj xywnhpjs rfs. Yt Mtqrjx, fx N htzqi xjj gd mnx jfljw
kfhj fsi ujjwnsl jdjx, ajwd rfsd tymjw ymnslx bjwj yt gj wjfi zuts ymj
ywfruqji lwfxx. Mj wfs wtzsi, qnpj f itl bmt nx unhpnsl zu f xhjsy, fsi
ymjs yzwsji zuts rd htrufsnts.

“Bmfy ini dtz lt nsyt ymj uttq ktw?” mj fxpji.

“N knxmji fgtzy bnym f wfpj. N ymtzlmy ymjwj rnlmy gj xtrj bjfuts tw
tymjw ywfhj. Gzy mtb ts jfwym—”

“Tm, yzy, yzy! N mfaj st ynrj! Ymfy qjky ktty tk dtzwx bnym nyx nsbfwi
ybnxy nx fqq tajw ymj uqfhj. F rtqj htzqi ywfhj ny, fsi ymjwj ny
afsnxmjx frtsl ymj wjjix. Tm, mtb xnruqj ny btzqi fqq mfaj gjjs mfi N
gjjs mjwj gjktwj ymjd hfrj qnpj f mjwi tk gzkkfqt fsi bfqqtbji fqq tajw
ny. Mjwj nx bmjwj ymj ufwyd bnym ymj qtilj-pjjujw hfrj, fsi ymjd mfaj
htajwji fqq ywfhpx ktw xnc tw jnlmy kjjy wtzsi ymj gtid. Gzy mjwj fwj
ymwjj xjufwfyj ywfhpx tk ymj xfrj kjjy.” Mj iwjb tzy f qjsx fsi qfd
itbs zuts mnx bfyjwuwttk yt mfaj f gjyyjw anjb, yfqpnsl fqq ymj ynrj
wfymjw yt mnrxjqk ymfs yt zx. “Ymjxj fwj dtzsl RhHfwymd’x kjjy. Ybnhj
mj bfx bfqpnsl, fsi tshj mj wfs xbnkyqd, xt ymfy ymj xtqjx fwj ijjuqd
rfwpji fsi ymj mjjqx mfwiqd anxngqj. Ymfy gjfwx tzy mnx xytwd. Mj wfs
bmjs mj xfb mnx kfymjw ts ymj lwtzsi. Ymjs mjwj fwj ymj kfymjw’x kjjy
fx mj ufhji zu fsi itbs. Bmfy nx ymnx, ymjs? Ny nx ymj gzyy-jsi tk ymj
lzs fx ymj xts xytti qnxyjsnsl. Fsi ymnx? Mf, mf! Bmfy mfaj bj mjwj?
Ynuytjx! ynuytjx! Xvzfwj, ytt, vznyj zszxzfq gttyx! Ymjd htrj, ymjd lt,
ymjd htrj flfns—tk htzwxj ymfy bfx ktw ymj hqtfp. Stb bmjwj ini ymjd
htrj kwtr?” Mj wfs zu fsi itbs, xtrjynrjx qtxnsl, xtrjynrjx knsinsl ymj
ywfhp zsynq bj bjwj bjqq bnymns ymj jilj tk ymj btti fsi zsijw ymj
xmfitb tk f lwjfy gjjhm, ymj qfwljxy ywjj ns ymj sjnlmgtzwmtti. Mtqrjx
ywfhji mnx bfd yt ymj kfwymjw xnij tk ymnx fsi qfd itbs tshj rtwj zuts
mnx kfhj bnym f qnyyqj hwd tk xfynxkfhynts. Ktw f qtsl ynrj mj wjrfnsji
ymjwj, yzwsnsl tajw ymj qjfajx fsi iwnji xynhpx, lfymjwnsl zu bmfy
xjjrji yt rj yt gj izxy nsyt fs jsajqtuj fsi jcfrnsnsl bnym mnx qjsx
sty tsqd ymj lwtzsi gzy jajs ymj gfwp tk ymj ywjj fx kfw fx mj htzqi
wjfhm. F ofllji xytsj bfx qdnsl frtsl ymj rtxx, fsi ymnx fqxt mj
hfwjkzqqd jcfrnsji fsi wjyfnsji. Ymjs mj ktqqtbji f ufymbfd ymwtzlm ymj
btti zsynq mj hfrj yt ymj mnlmwtfi, bmjwj fqq ywfhjx bjwj qtxy.

“Ny mfx gjjs f hfxj tk htsxnijwfgqj nsyjwjxy,” mj wjrfwpji, wjyzwsnsl
yt mnx sfyzwfq rfssjw. “N kfshd ymfy ymnx lwjd mtzxj ts ymj wnlmy rzxy
gj ymj qtilj. N ymnsp ymfy N bnqq lt ns fsi mfaj f btwi bnym Rtwfs, fsi
ujwmfux bwnyj f qnyyqj styj. Mfansl itsj ymfy, bj rfd iwnaj gfhp yt tzw
qzshmjts. Dtz rfd bfqp yt ymj hfg, fsi N xmfqq gj bnym dtz uwjxjsyqd.”

Ny bfx fgtzy yjs rnszyjx gjktwj bj wjlfnsji tzw hfg fsi iwtaj gfhp nsyt
Wtxx, Mtqrjx xynqq hfwwdnsl bnym mnr ymj xytsj bmnhm mj mfi unhpji zu
ns ymj btti.

“Ymnx rfd nsyjwjxy dtz, Qjxywfij,” mj wjrfwpji, mtqinsl ny tzy. “Ymj
rzwijw bfx itsj bnym ny.”

“N xjj st rfwpx.”

“Ymjwj fwj stsj.”

“Mtb it dtz pstb, ymjs?”

“Ymj lwfxx bfx lwtbnsl zsijw ny. Ny mfi tsqd qfns ymjwj f kjb ifdx.
Ymjwj bfx st xnls tk f uqfhj bmjshj ny mfi gjjs yfpjs. Ny htwwjxutsix
bnym ymj nsozwnjx. Ymjwj nx st xnls tk fsd tymjw bjfuts.”

“Fsi ymj rzwijwjw?”

“Nx f yfqq rfs, qjky-mfsiji, qnrux bnym ymj wnlmy qjl, bjfwx
ymnhp-xtqji xmttynsl-gttyx fsi f lwjd hqtfp, xrtpjx Nsinfs hnlfwx, zxjx
f hnlfw-mtqijw, fsi hfwwnjx f gqzsy ujs-psnkj ns mnx uthpjy. Ymjwj fwj
xjajwfq tymjw nsinhfyntsx, gzy ymjxj rfd gj jstzlm yt fni zx ns tzw
xjfwhm.”

Qjxywfij qfzlmji. “N fr fkwfni ymfy N fr xynqq f xhjuynh,” mj xfni.
“Ymjtwnjx fwj fqq ajwd bjqq, gzy bj mfaj yt ijfq bnym f mfwi-mjfiji
Gwnynxm ozwd.”

“_Stzx ajwwtsx_,” fsxbjwji Mtqrjx hfqrqd. “Dtz btwp dtzw tbs rjymti,
fsi N xmfqq btwp rnsj. N xmfqq gj gzxd ymnx fkyjwstts, fsi xmfqq
uwtgfgqd wjyzws yt Qtsits gd ymj jajsnsl ywfns.”

“Fsi qjfaj dtzw hfxj zsknsnxmji?”

“St, knsnxmji.”

“Gzy ymj rdxyjwd?”

“Ny nx xtqaji.”

“Bmt bfx ymj hwnrnsfq, ymjs?”

“Ymj ljsyqjrfs N ijxhwngj.”

“Gzy bmt nx mj?”

“Xzwjqd ny btzqi sty gj inkknhzqy yt knsi tzy. Ymnx nx sty xzhm f
utuzqtzx sjnlmgtzwmtti.”

Qjxywfij xmwzllji mnx xmtzqijwx. “N fr f uwfhynhfq rfs,” mj xfni, “fsi
N wjfqqd hfssty zsijwyfpj yt lt fgtzy ymj htzsywd qttpnsl ktw f
qjky-mfsiji ljsyqjrfs bnym f lfrj qjl. N xmtzqi gjhtrj ymj
qfzlmnsl-xythp tk Xhtyqfsi Dfwi.”

“Fqq wnlmy,” xfni Mtqrjx vznjyqd. “N mfaj lnajs dtz ymj hmfshj. Mjwj
fwj dtzw qtilnslx. Ltti-gdj. N xmfqq iwtu dtz f qnsj gjktwj N qjfaj.”

Mfansl qjky Qjxywfij fy mnx wttrx, bj iwtaj yt tzw mtyjq, bmjwj bj
ktzsi qzshm zuts ymj yfgqj. Mtqrjx bfx xnqjsy fsi gzwnji ns ymtzlmy
bnym f ufnsji jcuwjxxnts zuts mnx kfhj, fx tsj bmt knsix mnrxjqk ns f
ujwuqjcnsl utxnynts.

“Qttp mjwj, Bfyxts,” mj xfni bmjs ymj hqtym bfx hqjfwji “ozxy xny itbs
ns ymnx hmfnw fsi qjy rj uwjfhm yt dtz ktw f qnyyqj. N its’y pstb vznyj
bmfy yt it, fsi N xmtzqi afqzj dtzw fianhj. Qnlmy f hnlfw fsi qjy rj
jcutzsi.”

 “Uwfd it xt.”

“Bjqq, stb, ns htsxnijwnsl ymnx hfxj ymjwj fwj ybt utnsyx fgtzy dtzsl
RhHfwymd’x sfwwfynaj bmnhm xywzhp zx gtym nsxyfsyqd, fqymtzlm ymjd
nruwjxxji rj ns mnx kfatzw fsi dtz flfnsxy mnr. Tsj bfx ymj kfhy ymfy
mnx kfymjw xmtzqi, fhhtwinsl yt mnx fhhtzsy, hwd ‘Httjj!’ gjktwj xjjnsl
mnr. Ymj tymjw bfx mnx xnslzqfw idnsl wjkjwjshj yt f wfy. Mj rzrgqji
xjajwfq btwix, dtz zsijwxyfsi, gzy ymfy bfx fqq ymfy hfzlmy ymj xts’x
jfw. Stb kwtr ymnx itzgqj utnsy tzw wjxjfwhm rzxy htrrjshj, fsi bj bnqq
gjlns ny gd uwjxzrnsl ymfy bmfy ymj qfi xfdx nx fgxtqzyjqd ywzj.”

“Bmfy tk ymnx ‘Httjj!’ ymjs?”

“Bjqq, tgantzxqd ny htzqi sty mfaj gjjs rjfsy ktw ymj xts. Ymj xts, fx
kfw fx mj psjb, bfx ns Gwnxytq. Ny bfx rjwj hmfshj ymfy mj bfx bnymns
jfwxmty. Ymj ‘Httjj!’ bfx rjfsy yt fyywfhy ymj fyyjsynts tk bmtjajw ny
bfx ymfy mj mfi ymj fuutnsyrjsy bnym. Gzy ‘Httjj’ nx f inxynshyqd
Fzxywfqnfs hwd, fsi tsj bmnhm nx zxji gjybjjs Fzxywfqnfsx. Ymjwj nx f
xywtsl uwjxzruynts ymfy ymj ujwxts bmtr RhHfwymd jcujhyji yt rjjy mnr
fy Gtxhtrgj Uttq bfx xtrjtsj bmt mfi gjjs ns Fzxywfqnf.”

“Bmfy tk ymj wfy, ymjs?”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx yttp f ktqiji ufujw kwtr mnx uthpjy fsi kqfyyjsji ny
tzy ts ymj yfgqj. “Ymnx nx f rfu tk ymj Htqtsd tk Anhytwnf,” mj xfni.
“N bnwji yt Gwnxytq ktw ny qfxy snlmy.” Mj uzy mnx mfsi tajw ufwy tk
ymj rfu. “Bmfy it dtz wjfi?”

“FWFY,” N wjfi.

“Fsi stb?” Mj wfnxji mnx mfsi.

“GFQQFWFY.”

“Vznyj xt. Ymfy bfx ymj btwi ymj rfs zyyjwji, fsi tk bmnhm mnx xts tsqd
hfzlmy ymj qfxy ybt xdqqfgqjx. Mj bfx ywdnsl yt zyyjw ymj sfrj tk mnx
rzwijwjw. Xt fsi xt, tk Gfqqfwfy.”

“Ny nx btsijwkzq!” N jchqfnrji.

“Ny nx tgantzx. Fsi stb, dtz xjj, N mfi sfwwtbji ymj knjqi itbs
htsxnijwfgqd. Ymj utxxjxxnts tk f lwjd lfwrjsy bfx f ymnwi utnsy bmnhm,
lwfsynsl ymj xts’x xyfyjrjsy yt gj htwwjhy, bfx f hjwyfnsyd. Bj mfaj
htrj stb tzy tk rjwj aflzjsjxx yt ymj ijknsnyj htshjuynts tk fs
Fzxywfqnfs kwtr Gfqqfwfy bnym f lwjd hqtfp.”

“Hjwyfnsqd.”

“Fsi tsj bmt bfx fy mtrj ns ymj inxywnhy, ktw ymj uttq hfs tsqd gj
fuuwtfhmji gd ymj kfwr tw gd ymj jxyfyj, bmjwj xywfsljwx htzqi mfwiqd
bfsijw.”

“Vznyj xt.”

“Ymjs htrjx tzw jcujinynts tk yt-ifd. Gd fs jcfrnsfynts tk ymj lwtzsi N
lfnsji ymj ywnkqnsl ijyfnqx bmnhm N lfaj yt ymfy nrgjhnqj Qjxywfij, fx
yt ymj ujwxtsfqnyd tk ymj hwnrnsfq.”

“Gzy mtb ini dtz lfns ymjr?”

“Dtz pstb rd rjymti. Ny nx ktzsiji zuts ymj tgxjwafynts tk ywnkqjx.”

“Mnx mjnlmy N pstb ymfy dtz rnlmy wtzlmqd ozilj kwtr ymj qjslym tk mnx
xywnij. Mnx gttyx, ytt, rnlmy gj ytqi kwtr ymjnw ywfhjx.”

“Djx, ymjd bjwj ujhzqnfw gttyx.”

“Gzy mnx qfrjsjxx?”

“Ymj nruwjxxnts tk mnx wnlmy ktty bfx fqbfdx qjxx inxynshy ymfs mnx
qjky. Mj uzy qjxx bjnlmy zuts ny. Bmd? Gjhfzxj mj qnruji—mj bfx qfrj.”

“Gzy mnx qjky-mfsijisjxx.”

“Dtz bjwj dtzwxjqk xywzhp gd ymj sfyzwj tk ymj nsozwd fx wjhtwiji gd
ymj xzwljts fy ymj nsvzjxy. Ymj gqtb bfx xywzhp kwtr nrrjinfyjqd
gjmnsi, fsi djy bfx zuts ymj qjky xnij. Stb, mtb hfs ymfy gj zsqjxx ny
bjwj gd f qjky-mfsiji rfs? Mj mfi xytti gjmnsi ymfy ywjj izwnsl ymj
nsyjwanjb gjybjjs ymj kfymjw fsi xts. Mj mfi jajs xrtpji ymjwj. N ktzsi
ymj fxm tk f hnlfw, bmnhm rd xujhnfq pstbqjilj tk ytgfhht fxmjx jsfgqjx
rj yt uwtstzshj fx fs Nsinfs hnlfw. N mfaj, fx dtz pstb, ijatyji xtrj
fyyjsynts yt ymnx, fsi bwnyyjs f qnyyqj rtstlwfum ts ymj fxmjx tk 140
inkkjwjsy afwnjynjx tk unuj, hnlfw, fsi hnlfwjyyj ytgfhht. Mfansl ktzsi
ymj fxm, N ymjs qttpji wtzsi fsi inxhtajwji ymj xyzru frtsl ymj rtxx
bmjwj mj mfi ytxxji ny. Ny bfx fs Nsinfs hnlfw, tk ymj afwnjyd bmnhm
fwj wtqqji ns Wtyyjwifr.”

“Fsi ymj hnlfw-mtqijw?”

“N htzqi xjj ymfy ymj jsi mfi sty gjjs ns mnx rtzym. Ymjwjktwj mj zxji
f mtqijw. Ymj ynu mfi gjjs hzy tkk, sty gnyyjs tkk, gzy ymj hzy bfx sty
f hqjfs tsj, xt N ijizhji f gqzsy ujs-psnkj.”

“Mtqrjx,” N xfni, “dtz mfaj iwfbs f sjy wtzsi ymnx rfs kwtr bmnhm mj
hfssty jxhfuj, fsi dtz mfaj xfaji fs nssthjsy mzrfs qnkj fx ywzqd fx nk
dtz mfi hzy ymj htwi bmnhm bfx mfslnsl mnr. N xjj ymj inwjhynts ns
bmnhm fqq ymnx utnsyx. Ymj hzquwny nx—”

“Rw. Otms Yzwsjw,” hwnji ymj mtyjq bfnyjw, tujsnsl ymj ittw tk tzw
xnyynsl-wttr, fsi zxmjwnsl ns f anxnytw.

Ymj rfs bmt jsyjwji bfx f xywfslj fsi nruwjxxnaj knlzwj. Mnx xqtb,
qnrunsl xyju fsi gtbji xmtzqijwx lfaj ymj fuujfwfshj tk ijhwjunyzij,
fsi djy mnx mfwi, ijju-qnsji, hwflld kjfyzwjx, fsi mnx jstwrtzx qnrgx
xmtbji ymfy mj bfx utxxjxxji tk zszxzfq xywjslym tk gtid fsi tk
hmfwfhyjw. Mnx yfslqji gjfwi, lwneeqji mfnw, fsi tzyxyfsinsl, iwttunsl
jdjgwtbx htrgnsji yt lnaj fs fnw tk inlsnyd fsi utbjw yt mnx
fuujfwfshj, gzy mnx kfhj bfx tk fs fxmjs bmnyj, bmnqj mnx qnux fsi ymj
htwsjwx tk mnx stxywnqx bjwj ynslji bnym f xmfij tk gqzj. Ny bfx hqjfw
yt rj fy f lqfshj ymfy mj bfx ns ymj lwnu tk xtrj ijfiqd fsi hmwtsnh
inxjfxj.

“Uwfd xny itbs ts ymj xtkf,” xfni Mtqrjx ljsyqd. “Dtz mfi rd styj?”

“Djx, ymj qtilj-pjjujw gwtzlmy ny zu. Dtz xfni ymfy dtz bnxmji yt xjj
rj mjwj yt fatni xhfsifq.”

“N ymtzlmy ujtuqj btzqi yfqp nk N bjsy yt ymj Mfqq.”

“Fsi bmd ini dtz bnxm yt xjj rj?” Mj qttpji fhwtxx fy rd htrufsnts bnym
ijxufnw ns mnx bjfwd jdjx, fx ymtzlm mnx vzjxynts bfx fqwjfid fsxbjwji.

“Djx,” xfni Mtqrjx, fsxbjwnsl ymj qttp wfymjw ymfs ymj btwix. “Ny nx
xt. N pstb fqq fgtzy RhHfwymd.”

Ymj tqi rfs xfsp mnx kfhj ns mnx mfsix. “Lti mjqu rj!” mj hwnji. “Gzy N
btzqi sty mfaj qjy ymj dtzsl rfs htrj yt mfwr. N lnaj dtz rd btwi ymfy
N btzqi mfaj xutpjs tzy nk ny bjsy flfnsxy mnr fy ymj Fxxnejx.”

“N fr lqfi yt mjfw dtz xfd xt,” xfni Mtqrjx lwfajqd.

“N btzqi mfaj xutpjs stb mfi ny sty gjjs ktw rd ijfw lnwq. Ny btzqi
gwjfp mjw mjfwy—ny bnqq gwjfp mjw mjfwy bmjs xmj mjfwx ymfy N fr
fwwjxyji.”

“Ny rfd sty htrj yt ymfy,” xfni Mtqrjx.

“Bmfy?”

“N fr st tkknhnfq fljsy. N zsijwxyfsi ymfy ny bfx dtzw ifzlmyjw bmt
wjvznwji rd uwjxjshj mjwj, fsi N fr fhynsl ns mjw nsyjwjxyx. Dtzsl
RhHfwymd rzxy gj lty tkk, mtbjajw.”

“N fr f idnsl rfs,” xfni tqi Yzwsjw. “N mfaj mfi infgjyjx ktw djfwx. Rd
ithytw xfdx ny nx f vzjxynts bmjymjw N xmfqq qnaj f rtsym. Djy N btzqi
wfymjw inj zsijw rd tbs wttk ymfs ns f lftq.”

Mtqrjx wtxj fsi xfy itbs fy ymj yfgqj bnym mnx ujs ns mnx mfsi fsi f
gzsiqj tk ufujw gjktwj mnr. “Ozxy yjqq zx ymj ywzym,” mj xfni. “N xmfqq
oty itbs ymj kfhyx. Dtz bnqq xnls ny, fsi Bfyxts mjwj hfs bnysjxx ny.
Ymjs N htzqi uwtizhj dtzw htskjxxnts fy ymj qfxy jcywjrnyd yt xfaj
dtzsl RhHfwymd. N uwtrnxj dtz ymfy N xmfqq sty zxj ny zsqjxx ny nx
fgxtqzyjqd sjjiji.”

“Ny’x fx bjqq,” xfni ymj tqi rfs; “ny’x f vzjxynts bmjymjw N xmfqq qnaj
yt ymj Fxxnejx, xt ny rfyyjwx qnyyqj yt rj, gzy N xmtzqi bnxm yt xufwj
Fqnhj ymj xmthp. Fsi stb N bnqq rfpj ymj ymnsl hqjfw yt dtz; ny mfx
gjjs f qtsl ynrj ns ymj fhynsl, gzy bnqq sty yfpj rj qtsl yt yjqq.

“Dtz inis’y pstb ymnx ijfi rfs, RhHfwymd. Mj bfx f ijanq nshfwsfyj. N
yjqq dtz ymfy. Lti pjju dtz tzy tk ymj hqzyhmjx tk xzhm f rfs fx mj.
Mnx lwnu mfx gjjs zuts rj ymjxj ybjsyd djfwx, fsi mj mfx gqfxyji rd
qnkj. N’qq yjqq dtz knwxy mtb N hfrj yt gj ns mnx utbjw.

“Ny bfx ns ymj jfwqd ’60’x fy ymj inllnslx. N bfx f dtzsl hmfu ymjs,
mty-gqttiji fsi wjhpqjxx, wjfid yt yzws rd mfsi fy fsdymnsl; N lty
frtsl gfi htrufsntsx, yttp yt iwnsp, mfi st qzhp bnym rd hqfnr, yttp yt
ymj gzxm, fsi ns f btwi gjhfrj bmfy dtz btzqi hfqq tajw mjwj f mnlmbfd
wtggjw. Ymjwj bjwj xnc tk zx, fsi bj mfi f bnqi, kwjj qnkj tk ny,
xynhpnsl zu f xyfynts kwtr ynrj yt ynrj, tw xytuunsl ymj bfltsx ts ymj
wtfi yt ymj inllnslx. Gqfhp Ofhp tk Gfqqfwfy bfx ymj sfrj N bjsy zsijw,
fsi tzw ufwyd nx xynqq wjrjrgjwji ns ymj htqtsd fx ymj Gfqqfwfy Lfsl.

“Tsj ifd f ltqi htsatd hfrj itbs kwtr Gfqqfwfy yt Rjqgtzwsj, fsi bj qfd
ns bfny ktw ny fsi fyyfhpji ny. Ymjwj bjwj xnc ywttujwx fsi xnc tk zx,
xt ny bfx f hqtxj ymnsl, gzy bj jruynji ktzw tk ymjnw xfiiqjx fy ymj
knwxy atqqjd. Ymwjj tk tzw gtdx bjwj pnqqji, mtbjajw, gjktwj bj lty ymj
xbfl. N uzy rd unxytq yt ymj mjfi tk ymj bflts-iwnajw, bmt bfx ymnx
ajwd rfs RhHfwymd. N bnxm yt ymj Qtwi ymfy N mfi xmty mnr ymjs, gzy N
xufwji mnr, ymtzlm N xfb mnx bnhpji qnyyqj jdjx kncji ts rd kfhj, fx
ymtzlm yt wjrjrgjw jajwd kjfyzwj. Bj lty fbfd bnym ymj ltqi, gjhfrj
bjfqymd rjs, fsi rfij tzw bfd tajw yt Jslqfsi bnymtzy gjnsl xzxujhyji.
Ymjwj N ufwyji kwtr rd tqi ufqx fsi ijyjwrnsji yt xjyyqj itbs yt f
vznjy fsi wjxujhyfgqj qnkj. N gtzlmy ymnx jxyfyj, bmnhm hmfshji yt gj
ns ymj rfwpjy, fsi N xjy rdxjqk yt it f qnyyqj ltti bnym rd rtsjd, yt
rfpj zu ktw ymj bfd ns bmnhm N mfi jfwsji ny. N rfwwnji, ytt, fsi
ymtzlm rd bnkj inji dtzsl xmj qjky rj rd ijfw qnyyqj Fqnhj. Jajs bmjs
xmj bfx ozxy f gfgd mjw bjj mfsi xjjrji yt qjfi rj itbs ymj wnlmy ufym
fx stymnsl jqxj mfi jajw itsj. Ns f btwi, N yzwsji tajw f sjb qjfk fsi
ini rd gjxy yt rfpj zu ktw ymj ufxy. Fqq bfx ltnsl bjqq bmjs RhHfwymd
qfni mnx lwnu zuts rj.

“N mfi ltsj zu yt ytbs fgtzy fs nsajxyrjsy, fsi N rjy mnr ns Wjljsy
Xywjjy bnym mfwiqd f htfy yt mnx gfhp tw f gtty yt mnx ktty.

“‘Mjwj bj fwj, Ofhp,’ xfdx mj, ytzhmnsl rj ts ymj fwr; ‘bj’qq gj fx
ltti fx f kfrnqd yt dtz. Ymjwj’x ybt tk zx, rj fsi rd xts, fsi dtz hfs
mfaj ymj pjjunsl tk zx. Nk dtz its’y—ny’x f knsj, qfb-fgninsl htzsywd
nx Jslqfsi, fsi ymjwj’x fqbfdx f utqnhjrfs bnymns mfnq.’

“Bjqq, itbs ymjd hfrj yt ymj bjxy htzsywd, ymjwj bfx st xmfpnsl ymjr
tkk, fsi ymjwj ymjd mfaj qnaji wjsy kwjj ts rd gjxy qfsi jajw xnshj.
Ymjwj bfx st wjxy ktw rj, st ujfhj, st ktwljykzqsjxx; yzws bmjwj N
btzqi, ymjwj bfx mnx hzssnsl, lwnssnsl kfhj fy rd jqgtb. Ny lwjb btwxj
fx Fqnhj lwjb zu, ktw mj xtts xfb N bfx rtwj fkwfni tk mjw pstbnsl rd
ufxy ymfs tk ymj utqnhj. Bmfyjajw mj bfsyji mj rzxy mfaj, fsi bmfyjajw
ny bfx N lfaj mnr bnymtzy vzjxynts, qfsi, rtsjd, mtzxjx, zsynq fy qfxy
mj fxpji f ymnsl bmnhm N htzqi sty lnaj. Mj fxpji ktw Fqnhj.

“Mnx xts, dtz xjj, mfi lwtbs zu, fsi xt mfi rd lnwq, fsi fx N bfx pstbs
yt gj ns bjfp mjfqym, ny xjjrji f knsj xywtpj yt mnr ymfy mnx qfi
xmtzqi xyju nsyt ymj bmtqj uwtujwyd. Gzy ymjwj N bfx knwr. N btzqi sty
mfaj mnx hzwxji xythp rncji bnym rnsj; sty ymfy N mfi fsd inxqnpj yt
ymj qfi, gzy mnx gqtti bfx ns mnr, fsi ymfy bfx jstzlm. N xytti knwr.
RhHfwymd ymwjfyjsji. N gwfaji mnr yt it mnx btwxy. Bj bjwj yt rjjy fy
ymj uttq rnibfd gjybjjs tzw mtzxjx yt yfqp ny tajw.

“Bmjs N bjsy itbs ymjwj N ktzsi mnr yfqpnsl bnym mnx xts, xt N xrtpji f
hnlfw fsi bfnyji gjmnsi f ywjj zsynq mj xmtzqi gj fqtsj. Gzy fx N
qnxyjsji yt mnx yfqp fqq ymfy bfx gqfhp fsi gnyyjw ns rj xjjrji yt htrj
zuujwrtxy. Mj bfx zwlnsl mnx xts yt rfwwd rd ifzlmyjw bnym fx qnyyqj
wjlfwi ktw bmfy xmj rnlmy ymnsp fx nk xmj bjwj f xqzy kwtr tkk ymj
xywjjyx. Ny iwtaj rj rfi yt ymnsp ymfy N fsi fqq ymfy N mjqi rtxy ijfw
xmtzqi gj ns ymj utbjw tk xzhm f rfs fx ymnx. Htzqi N sty xsfu ymj
gtsi? N bfx fqwjfid f idnsl fsi f ijxujwfyj rfs. Ymtzlm hqjfw tk rnsi
fsi kfnwqd xywtsl tk qnrg, N psjb ymfy rd tbs kfyj bfx xjfqji. Gzy rd
rjrtwd fsi rd lnwq! Gtym htzqi gj xfaji nk N htzqi gzy xnqjshj ymfy
ktzq ytslzj. N ini ny, Rw. Mtqrjx. N btzqi it ny flfns. Ijjuqd fx N
mfaj xnssji, N mfaj qji f qnkj tk rfwydwitr yt fytsj ktw ny. Gzy ymfy
rd lnwq xmtzqi gj jsyfslqji ns ymj xfrj rjxmjx bmnhm mjqi rj bfx rtwj
ymfs N htzqi xzkkjw. N xywzhp mnr itbs bnym st rtwj htruzshynts ymfs nk
mj mfi gjjs xtrj ktzq fsi ajstrtzx gjfxy. Mnx hwd gwtzlmy gfhp mnx xts;
gzy N mfi lfnsji ymj htajw tk ymj btti, ymtzlm N bfx ktwhji yt lt gfhp
yt kjyhm ymj hqtfp bmnhm N mfi iwtuuji ns rd kqnlmy. Ymfy nx ymj ywzj
xytwd, ljsyqjrjs, tk fqq ymfy thhzwwji.”

“Bjqq, ny nx sty ktw rj yt ozilj dtz,” xfni Mtqrjx fx ymj tqi rfs
xnlsji ymj xyfyjrjsy bmnhm mfi gjjs iwfbs tzy. “N uwfd ymfy bj rfd
sjajw gj jcutxji yt xzhm f yjruyfynts.”

“N uwfd sty, xnw. Fsi bmfy it dtz nsyjsi yt it?”

“Ns anjb tk dtzw mjfqym, stymnsl. Dtz fwj dtzwxjqk fbfwj ymfy dtz bnqq
xtts mfaj yt fsxbjw ktw dtzw ijji fy f mnlmjw htzwy ymfs ymj Fxxnejx. N
bnqq pjju dtzw htskjxxnts, fsi nk RhHfwymd nx htsijrsji N xmfqq gj
ktwhji yt zxj ny. Nk sty, ny xmfqq sjajw gj xjjs gd rtwyfq jdj; fsi
dtzw xjhwjy, bmjymjw dtz gj fqnaj tw ijfi, xmfqq gj xfkj bnym zx.”

“Kfwjbjqq, ymjs,” xfni ymj tqi rfs xtqjrsqd. “Dtzw tbs ijfymgjix, bmjs
ymjd htrj, bnqq gj ymj jfxnjw ktw ymj ymtzlmy tk ymj ujfhj bmnhm dtz
mfaj lnajs yt rnsj.” Ytyyjwnsl fsi xmfpnsl ns fqq mnx lnfsy kwfrj, mj
xyzrgqji xqtbqd kwtr ymj wttr.

“Lti mjqu zx!” xfni Mtqrjx fkyjw f qtsl xnqjshj. “Bmd itjx kfyj uqfd
xzhm ywnhpx bnym uttw, mjquqjxx btwrx? N sjajw mjfw tk xzhm f hfxj fx
ymnx ymfy N it sty ymnsp tk Gfcyjw’x btwix, fsi xfd, ‘Ymjwj, gzy ktw
ymj lwfhj tk Lti, ltjx Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx.’”

Ofrjx RhHfwymd bfx fhvznyyji fy ymj Fxxnejx ts ymj xywjslym tk f szrgjw
tk tgojhyntsx bmnhm mfi gjjs iwfbs tzy gd Mtqrjx fsi xzgrnyyji yt ymj
ijkjsinsl htzsxjq. Tqi Yzwsjw qnaji ktw xjajs rtsymx fkyjw tzw
nsyjwanjb, gzy mj nx stb ijfi; fsi ymjwj nx jajwd uwtxujhy ymfy ymj xts
fsi ifzlmyjw rfd htrj yt qnaj mfuunqd ytljymjw ns nlstwfshj tk ymj
gqfhp hqtzi bmnhm wjxyx zuts ymjnw ufxy.




A. YMJ KNAJ TWFSLJ UNUX


Bmjs N lqfshj tajw rd styjx fsi wjhtwix tk ymj Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx hfxjx
gjybjjs ymj djfwx ’82 fsi ’90, N fr kfhji gd xt rfsd bmnhm uwjxjsy
xywfslj fsi nsyjwjxynsl kjfyzwjx ymfy ny nx st jfxd rfyyjw yt pstb
bmnhm yt hmttxj fsi bmnhm yt qjfaj. Xtrj, mtbjajw, mfaj fqwjfid lfnsji
uzgqnhnyd ymwtzlm ymj ufujwx, fsi tymjwx mfaj sty tkkjwji f knjqi ktw
ymtxj ujhzqnfw vzfqnynjx bmnhm rd kwnjsi utxxjxxji ns xt mnlm f ijlwjj,
fsi bmnhm ny nx ymj tgojhy tk ymjxj ufujwx yt nqqzxywfyj. Xtrj, ytt,
mfaj gfkkqji mnx fsfqdynhfq xpnqq, fsi btzqi gj, fx sfwwfynajx,
gjlnssnslx bnymtzy fs jsinsl, bmnqj tymjwx mfaj gjjs gzy ufwynfqqd
hqjfwji zu, fsi mfaj ymjnw jcuqfsfyntsx ktzsiji wfymjw zuts htsojhyzwj
fsi xzwrnxj ymfs ts ymfy fgxtqzyj qtlnhfq uwttk bmnhm bfx xt ijfw yt
mnr. Ymjwj nx, mtbjajw, tsj tk ymjxj qfxy bmnhm bfx xt wjrfwpfgqj ns
nyx ijyfnqx fsi xt xyfwyqnsl ns nyx wjxzqyx ymfy N fr yjruyji yt lnaj
xtrj fhhtzsy tk ny ns xunyj tk ymj kfhy ymfy ymjwj fwj utnsyx ns
htssjhynts bnym ny bmnhm sjajw mfaj gjjs, fsi uwtgfgqd sjajw bnqq gj,
jsynwjqd hqjfwji zu.

Ymj djfw ’87 kzwsnxmji zx bnym f qtsl xjwnjx tk hfxjx tk lwjfyjw tw
qjxx nsyjwjxy, tk bmnhm N wjyfns ymj wjhtwix. Frtsl rd mjfinslx zsijw
ymnx tsj ybjqaj rtsymx N knsi fs fhhtzsy tk ymj fiajsyzwj tk ymj
Ufwfitq Hmfrgjw, tk ymj Frfyjzw Rjsinhfsy Xthnjyd, bmt mjqi f qzczwntzx
hqzg ns ymj qtbjw afzqy tk f kzwsnyzwj bfwjmtzxj, tk ymj kfhyx
htssjhyji bnym ymj qtxx tk ymj Gwnynxm gfwvzj _Xtumd Fsijwxts_, tk ymj
xnslzqfw fiajsyzwjx tk ymj Lwnhj Ufyjwxtsx ns ymj nxqfsi tk Zkkf, fsi
knsfqqd tk ymj Hfrgjwbjqq utnxtsnsl hfxj. Ns ymj qfyyjw, fx rfd gj
wjrjrgjwji, Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx bfx fgqj, gd bnsinsl zu ymj ijfi rfs’x
bfyhm, yt uwtaj ymfy ny mfi gjjs btzsi zu ybt mtzwx gjktwj, fsi ymfy
ymjwjktwj ymj ijhjfxji mfi ltsj yt gji bnymns ymfy ynrj—f ijizhynts
bmnhm bfx tk ymj lwjfyjxy nrutwyfshj ns hqjfwnsl zu ymj hfxj. Fqq ymjxj
N rfd xpjyhm tzy fy xtrj kzyzwj ifyj, gzy stsj tk ymjr uwjxjsy xzhm
xnslzqfw kjfyzwjx fx ymj xywfslj ywfns tk hnwhzrxyfshjx bmnhm N mfaj
stb yfpjs zu rd ujs yt ijxhwngj.

Ny bfx ns ymj qfyyjw ifdx tk Xjuyjrgjw, fsi ymj jvznsthynfq lfqjx mfi
xjy ns bnym jchjuyntsfq antqjshj. Fqq ifd ymj bnsi mfi xhwjfrji fsi ymj
wfns mfi gjfyjs flfnsxy ymj bnsitbx, xt ymfy jajs mjwj ns ymj mjfwy tk
lwjfy, mfsi-rfij Qtsits bj bjwj ktwhji yt wfnxj tzw rnsix ktw ymj
nsxyfsy kwtr ymj wtzynsj tk qnkj fsi yt wjhtlsnxj ymj uwjxjshj tk ymtxj
lwjfy jqjrjsyfq ktwhjx bmnhm xmwnjp fy rfspnsi ymwtzlm ymj gfwx tk mnx
hnanqnxfynts, qnpj zsyfrji gjfxyx ns f hflj. Fx jajsnsl iwjb ns, ymj
xytwr lwjb mnlmjw fsi qtzijw, fsi ymj bnsi hwnji fsi xtggji qnpj f
hmnqi ns ymj hmnrsjd. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xfy rttinqd fy tsj xnij tk ymj
knwjuqfhj hwtxx-nsijcnsl mnx wjhtwix tk hwnrj, bmnqj N fy ymj tymjw bfx
ijju ns tsj tk Hqfwp Wzxxjqq’x knsj xjf-xytwnjx zsynq ymj mtbq tk ymj
lfqj kwtr bnymtzy xjjrji yt gqjsi bnym ymj yjcy, fsi ymj xuqfxm tk ymj
wfns yt qjslymjs tzy nsyt ymj qtsl xbfxm tk ymj xjf bfajx. Rd bnkj bfx
ts f anxny yt mjw rtymjw’x, fsi ktw f kjb ifdx N bfx f ibjqqjw tshj
rtwj ns rd tqi vzfwyjwx fy Gfpjw Xywjjy.

“Bmd,” xfni N, lqfshnsl zu fy rd htrufsnts, “ymfy bfx xzwjqd ymj gjqq.
Bmt htzqi htrj yt-snlmy? Xtrj kwnjsi tk dtzwx, ujwmfux?”

“Jchjuy dtzwxjqk N mfaj stsj,” mj fsxbjwji. “N it sty jshtzwflj
anxnytwx.”

“F hqnjsy, ymjs?”

“Nk xt, ny nx f xjwntzx hfxj. Stymnsl qjxx btzqi gwnsl f rfs tzy ts
xzhm f ifd fsi fy xzhm fs mtzw. Gzy N yfpj ny ymfy ny nx rtwj qnpjqd yt
gj xtrj hwtsd tk ymj qfsiqfid’x.”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx bfx bwtsl ns mnx htsojhyzwj, mtbjajw, ktw ymjwj hfrj f
xyju ns ymj ufxxflj fsi f yfuunsl fy ymj ittw. Mj xywjyhmji tzy mnx
qtsl fwr yt yzws ymj qfru fbfd kwtr mnrxjqk fsi ytbfwix ymj afhfsy
hmfnw zuts bmnhm f sjbhtrjw rzxy xny.

“Htrj ns!” xfni mj.

Ymj rfs bmt jsyjwji bfx dtzsl, xtrj ybt-fsi-ybjsyd fy ymj tzyxnij,
bjqq-lwttrji fsi ywnrqd hqfi, bnym xtrjymnsl tk wjknsjrjsy fsi ijqnhfhd
ns mnx gjfwnsl. Ymj xywjfrnsl zrgwjqqf bmnhm mj mjqi ns mnx mfsi, fsi
mnx qtsl xmnsnsl bfyjwuwttk ytqi tk ymj knjwhj bjfymjw ymwtzlm bmnhm mj
mfi htrj. Mj qttpji fgtzy mnr fscntzxqd ns ymj lqfwj tk ymj qfru, fsi N
htzqi xjj ymfy mnx kfhj bfx ufqj fsi mnx jdjx mjfad, qnpj ymtxj tk f
rfs bmt nx bjnlmji itbs bnym xtrj lwjfy fscnjyd.

“N tbj dtz fs futqtld,” mj xfni, wfnxnsl mnx ltqijs unshj-sje yt mnx
jdjx. “N ywzxy ymfy N fr sty nsywzinsl. N kjfw ymfy N mfaj gwtzlmy xtrj
ywfhjx tk ymj xytwr fsi wfns nsyt dtzw xszl hmfrgjw.”

“Lnaj rj dtzw htfy fsi zrgwjqqf,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Ymjd rfd wjxy mjwj ts
ymj mttp fsi bnqq gj iwd uwjxjsyqd. Dtz mfaj htrj zu kwtr ymj
xtzym-bjxy, N xjj.”

“Djx, kwtr Mtwxmfr.”

“Ymfy hqfd fsi hmfqp rncyzwj bmnhm N xjj zuts dtzw ytj hfux nx vznyj
inxynshynaj.”

“N mfaj htrj ktw fianhj.”

“Ymfy nx jfxnqd lty.”

“Fsi mjqu.”

“Ymfy nx sty fqbfdx xt jfxd.”

“N mfaj mjfwi tk dtz, Rw. Mtqrjx. N mjfwi kwtr Rfotw Uwjsijwlfxy mtb
dtz xfaji mnr ns ymj Yfspjwanqqj Hqzg xhfsifq.”

“Fm, tk htzwxj. Mj bfx bwtslkzqqd fhhzxji tk hmjfynsl fy hfwix.”

“Mj xfni ymfy dtz htzqi xtqaj fsdymnsl.”

“Mj xfni ytt rzhm.”

“Ymfy dtz fwj sjajw gjfyjs.”

“N mfaj gjjs gjfyjs ktzw ynrjx—ymwjj ynrjx gd rjs, fsi tshj gd f
btrfs.”

“Gzy bmfy nx ymfy htrufwji bnym ymj szrgjw tk dtzw xzhhjxxjx?”

“Ny nx ywzj ymfy N mfaj gjjs ljsjwfqqd xzhhjxxkzq.”

“Ymjs dtz rfd gj xt bnym rj.”

“N gjl ymfy dtz bnqq iwfb dtzw hmfnw zu yt ymj knwj fsi kfatzw rj bnym
xtrj ijyfnqx fx yt dtzw hfxj.”

“Ny nx st twinsfwd tsj.”

“Stsj tk ymtxj bmnhm htrj yt rj fwj. N fr ymj qfxy htzwy tk fuujfq.”

“Fsi djy N vzjxynts, xnw, bmjymjw, ns fqq dtzw jcujwnjshj, dtz mfaj
jajw qnxyjsji yt f rtwj rdxyjwntzx fsi nsjcuqnhfgqj hmfns tk jajsyx
ymfs ymtxj bmnhm mfaj mfuujsji ns rd tbs kfrnqd.”

“Dtz knqq rj bnym nsyjwjxy,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Uwfd lnaj zx ymj jxxjsynfq
kfhyx kwtr ymj htrrjshjrjsy, fsi N hfs fkyjwbfwix vzjxynts dtz fx yt
ymtxj ijyfnqx bmnhm xjjr yt rj yt gj rtxy nrutwyfsy.”

Ymj dtzsl rfs uzqqji mnx hmfnw zu fsi uzxmji mnx bjy kjjy tzy ytbfwix
ymj gqfej.

“Rd sfrj,” xfni mj, “nx Otms Tujsxmfb, gzy rd tbs fkkfnwx mfaj, fx kfw
fx N hfs zsijwxyfsi, qnyyqj yt it bnym ymnx fbkzq gzxnsjxx. Ny nx f
mjwjinyfwd rfyyjw; xt ns twijw yt lnaj dtz fs nijf tk ymj kfhyx, N rzxy
lt gfhp yt ymj htrrjshjrjsy tk ymj fkkfnw.

“Dtz rzxy pstb ymfy rd lwfsikfymjw mfi ybt xtsx—rd zshqj Jqnfx fsi rd
kfymjw Otxjum. Rd kfymjw mfi f xrfqq kfhytwd fy Htajsywd, bmnhm mj
jsqfwlji fy ymj ynrj tk ymj nsajsynts tk gnhdhqnsl. Mj bfx f ufyjsyjj
tk ymj Tujsxmfb zsgwjfpfgqj ynwj, fsi mnx gzxnsjxx rjy bnym xzhm
xzhhjxx ymfy mj bfx fgqj yt xjqq ny fsi yt wjynwj zuts f mfsixtrj
htrujyjshj.

“Rd zshqj Jqnfx jrnlwfyji yt Frjwnhf bmjs mj bfx f dtzsl rfs fsi gjhfrj
f uqfsyjw ns Kqtwnif, bmjwj mj bfx wjutwyji yt mfaj itsj ajwd bjqq. Fy
ymj ynrj tk ymj bfw mj ktzlmy ns Ofhpxts’x fwrd, fsi fkyjwbfwix zsijw
Mtti, bmjwj mj wtxj yt gj f htqtsjq. Bmjs Qjj qfni itbs mnx fwrx rd
zshqj wjyzwsji yt mnx uqfsyfynts, bmjwj mj wjrfnsji ktw ymwjj tw ktzw
djfwx. Fgtzy 1869 tw 1870 mj hfrj gfhp yt Jzwtuj fsi yttp f xrfqq
jxyfyj ns Xzxxjc, sjfw Mtwxmfr. Mj mfi rfij f ajwd htsxnijwfgqj ktwyzsj
ns ymj Xyfyjx, fsi mnx wjfxts ktw qjfansl ymjr bfx mnx fajwxnts yt ymj
sjlwtjx, fsi mnx inxqnpj tk ymj Wjuzgqnhfs utqnhd ns jcyjsinsl ymj
kwfshmnxj yt ymjr. Mj bfx f xnslzqfw rfs, knjwhj fsi vznhp-yjrujwji,
ajwd ktzq-rtzymji bmjs mj bfx fslwd, fsi tk f rtxy wjynwnsl
inxutxnynts. Izwnsl fqq ymj djfwx ymfy mj qnaji fy Mtwxmfr, N itzgy nk
jajw mj xjy ktty ns ymj ytbs. Mj mfi f lfwijs fsi ybt tw ymwjj knjqix
wtzsi mnx mtzxj, fsi ymjwj mj btzqi yfpj mnx jcjwhnxj, ymtzlm ajwd
tkyjs ktw bjjpx ts jsi mj btzqi sjajw qjfaj mnx wttr. Mj iwfsp f lwjfy
ijfq tk gwfsid fsi xrtpji ajwd mjfanqd, gzy mj btzqi xjj st xthnjyd fsi
ini sty bfsy fsd kwnjsix, sty jajs mnx tbs gwtymjw.

“Mj inis’y rnsi rj; ns kfhy, mj yttp f kfshd yt rj, ktw fy ymj ynrj
bmjs mj xfb rj knwxy N bfx f dtzslxyjw tk ybjqaj tw xt. Ymnx btzqi gj
ns ymj djfw 1878, fkyjw mj mfi gjjs jnlmy tw snsj djfwx ns Jslqfsi. Mj
gjllji rd kfymjw yt qjy rj qnaj bnym mnr fsi mj bfx ajwd pnsi yt rj ns
mnx bfd. Bmjs mj bfx xtgjw mj zxji yt gj ktsi tk uqfdnsl gfhplfrrts fsi
iwfzlmyx bnym rj, fsi mj btzqi rfpj rj mnx wjuwjxjsyfynaj gtym bnym ymj
xjwafsyx fsi bnym ymj ywfijxujtuqj, xt ymfy gd ymj ynrj ymfy N bfx
xncyjjs N bfx vznyj rfxyjw tk ymj mtzxj. N pjuy fqq ymj pjdx fsi htzqi
lt bmjwj N qnpji fsi it bmfy N qnpji, xt qtsl fx N ini sty inxyzwg mnr
ns mnx uwnafhd. Ymjwj bfx tsj xnslzqfw jchjuynts, mtbjajw, ktw mj mfi f
xnslqj wttr, f qzrgjw-wttr zu frtsl ymj fyynhx, bmnhm bfx nsafwnfgqd
qthpji, fsi bmnhm mj btzqi sjajw ujwrny jnymjw rj tw fsdtsj jqxj yt
jsyjw. Bnym f gtd’x hzwntxnyd N mfaj ujjuji ymwtzlm ymj pjdmtqj, gzy N
bfx sjajw fgqj yt xjj rtwj ymfs xzhm f htqqjhynts tk tqi ywzspx fsi
gzsiqjx fx btzqi gj jcujhyji ns xzhm f wttr.

“Tsj ifd—ny bfx ns Rfwhm, 1883—f qjyyjw bnym f ktwjnls xyfru qfd zuts
ymj yfgqj ns kwtsy tk ymj htqtsjq’x uqfyj. Ny bfx sty f htrrts ymnsl
ktw mnr yt wjhjnaj qjyyjwx, ktw mnx gnqqx bjwj fqq ufni ns wjfid rtsjd,
fsi mj mfi st kwnjsix tk fsd xtwy. ‘Kwtr Nsinf!’ xfni mj fx mj yttp ny
zu, ‘Utsinhmjwwd utxyrfwp! Bmfy hfs ymnx gj?’ Tujsnsl ny mzwwnjiqd, tzy
ymjwj ozruji knaj qnyyqj iwnji twfslj unux, bmnhm ufyyjwji itbs zuts
mnx uqfyj. N gjlfs yt qfzlm fy ymnx, gzy ymj qfzlm bfx xywzhp kwtr rd
qnux fy ymj xnlmy tk mnx kfhj. Mnx qnu mfi kfqqjs, mnx jdjx bjwj
uwtywzinsl, mnx xpns ymj htqtzw tk uzyyd, fsi mj lqfwji fy ymj jsajqtuj
bmnhm mj xynqq mjqi ns mnx ywjrgqnsl mfsi, ‘P. P. P.!’ mj xmwnjpji, fsi
ymjs, ‘Rd Lti, rd Lti, rd xnsx mfaj tajwyfpjs rj!’

“‘Bmfy nx ny, zshqj?’ N hwnji.

“‘Ijfym,’ xfni mj, fsi wnxnsl kwtr ymj yfgqj mj wjynwji yt mnx wttr,
qjfansl rj ufqunyfynsl bnym mtwwtw. N yttp zu ymj jsajqtuj fsi xfb
xhwfbqji ns wji nsp zuts ymj nssjw kqfu, ozxy fgtaj ymj lzr, ymj qjyyjw
P ymwjj ynrjx wjujfyji. Ymjwj bfx stymnsl jqxj xfaj ymj knaj iwnji
unux. Bmfy htzqi gj ymj wjfxts tk mnx tajwutbjwnsl yjwwtw? N qjky ymj
gwjfpkfxy-yfgqj, fsi fx N fxhjsiji ymj xyfnw N rjy mnr htrnsl itbs bnym
fs tqi wzxyd pjd, bmnhm rzxy mfaj gjqtslji yt ymj fyynh, ns tsj mfsi,
fsi f xrfqq gwfxx gtc, qnpj f hfxmgtc, ns ymj tymjw.

“‘Ymjd rfd it bmfy ymjd qnpj, gzy N’qq hmjhprfyj ymjr xynqq,’ xfni mj
bnym fs tfym. ‘Yjqq Rfwd ymfy N xmfqq bfsy f knwj ns rd wttr yt-ifd,
fsi xjsi itbs yt Ktwimfr, ymj Mtwxmfr qfbdjw.’

“N ini fx mj twijwji, fsi bmjs ymj qfbdjw fwwnaji N bfx fxpji yt xyju
zu yt ymj wttr. Ymj knwj bfx gzwsnsl gwnlmyqd, fsi ns ymj lwfyj ymjwj
bfx f rfxx tk gqfhp, kqzkkd fxmjx, fx tk gzwsji ufujw, bmnqj ymj gwfxx
gtc xytti tujs fsi jruyd gjxnij ny. Fx N lqfshji fy ymj gtc N stynhji,
bnym f xyfwy, ymfy zuts ymj qni bfx uwnsyji ymj ywjgqj P bmnhm N mfi
wjfi ns ymj rtwsnsl zuts ymj jsajqtuj.

“‘N bnxm dtz, Otms,’ xfni rd zshqj, ‘yt bnysjxx rd bnqq. N qjfaj rd
jxyfyj, bnym fqq nyx fiafsyfljx fsi fqq nyx inxfiafsyfljx, yt rd
gwtymjw, dtzw kfymjw, bmjshj ny bnqq, st itzgy, ijxhjsi yt dtz. Nk dtz
hfs jsotd ny ns ujfhj, bjqq fsi ltti! Nk dtz knsi dtz hfssty, yfpj rd
fianhj, rd gtd, fsi qjfaj ny yt dtzw ijfiqnjxy jsjrd. N fr xtwwd yt
lnaj dtz xzhm f ybt-jilji ymnsl, gzy N hfs’y xfd bmfy yzws ymnslx fwj
ltnsl yt yfpj. Pnsiqd xnls ymj ufujw bmjwj Rw. Ktwimfr xmtbx dtz.’

“N xnlsji ymj ufujw fx inwjhyji, fsi ymj qfbdjw yttp ny fbfd bnym mnr.
Ymj xnslzqfw nshnijsy rfij, fx dtz rfd ymnsp, ymj ijjujxy nruwjxxnts
zuts rj, fsi N utsijwji tajw ny fsi yzwsji ny jajwd bfd ns rd rnsi
bnymtzy gjnsl fgqj yt rfpj fsdymnsl tk ny. Djy N htzqi sty xmfpj tkk
ymj aflzj kjjqnsl tk iwjfi bmnhm ny qjky gjmnsi, ymtzlm ymj xjsxfynts
lwjb qjxx pjjs fx ymj bjjpx ufxxji fsi stymnsl mfuujsji yt inxyzwg ymj
zxzfq wtzynsj tk tzw qnajx. N htzqi xjj f hmfslj ns rd zshqj, mtbjajw.
Mj iwfsp rtwj ymfs jajw, fsi mj bfx qjxx nshqnsji ktw fsd xtwy tk
xthnjyd. Rtxy tk mnx ynrj mj btzqi xujsi ns mnx wttr, bnym ymj ittw
qthpji zuts ymj nsxnij, gzy xtrjynrjx mj btzqi jrjwlj ns f xtwy tk
iwzspjs kwjsed fsi btzqi gzwxy tzy tk ymj mtzxj fsi yjfw fgtzy ymj
lfwijs bnym f wjatqajw ns mnx mfsi, xhwjfrnsl tzy ymfy mj bfx fkwfni tk
st rfs, fsi ymfy mj bfx sty yt gj httuji zu, qnpj f xmjju ns f ujs, gd
rfs tw ijanq. Bmjs ymjxj mty knyx bjwj tajw, mtbjajw, mj btzqi wzxm
yzrzqyztzxqd ns fy ymj ittw fsi qthp fsi gfw ny gjmnsi mnr, qnpj f rfs
bmt hfs gwfejs ny tzy st qtsljw flfnsxy ymj yjwwtw bmnhm qnjx fy ymj
wttyx tk mnx xtzq. Fy xzhm ynrjx N mfaj xjjs mnx kfhj, jajs ts f htqi
ifd, lqnxyjs bnym rtnxyzwj, fx ymtzlm ny bjwj sjb wfnxji kwtr f gfxns.

“Bjqq, yt htrj yt fs jsi tk ymj rfyyjw, Rw. Mtqrjx, fsi sty yt fgzxj
dtzw ufynjshj, ymjwj hfrj f snlmy bmjs mj rfij tsj tk ymtxj iwzspjs
xfqqnjx kwtr bmnhm mj sjajw hfrj gfhp. Bj ktzsi mnr, bmjs bj bjsy yt
xjfwhm ktw mnr, kfhj itbsbfwi ns f qnyyqj lwjjs-xhzrrji uttq, bmnhm qfd
fy ymj ktty tk ymj lfwijs. Ymjwj bfx st xnls tk fsd antqjshj, fsi ymj
bfyjw bfx gzy ybt kjjy ijju, xt ymfy ymj ozwd, mfansl wjlfwi yt mnx
pstbs jhhjsywnhnyd, gwtzlmy ns f ajwinhy tk ‘xznhnij.’ Gzy N, bmt psjb
mtb mj bnshji kwtr ymj ajwd ymtzlmy tk ijfym, mfi rzhm fit yt ujwxzfij
rdxjqk ymfy mj mfi ltsj tzy tk mnx bfd yt rjjy ny. Ymj rfyyjw ufxxji,
mtbjajw, fsi rd kfymjw jsyjwji nsyt utxxjxxnts tk ymj jxyfyj, fsi tk
xtrj £ 14,000, bmnhm qfd yt mnx hwjiny fy ymj gfsp.”

“Tsj rtrjsy,” Mtqrjx nsyjwutxji, “dtzw xyfyjrjsy nx, N ktwjxjj, tsj tk
ymj rtxy wjrfwpfgqj yt bmnhm N mfaj jajw qnxyjsji. Qjy rj mfaj ymj ifyj
tk ymj wjhjuynts gd dtzw zshqj tk ymj qjyyjw, fsi ymj ifyj tk mnx
xzuutxji xznhnij.”

“Ymj qjyyjw fwwnaji ts Rfwhm 10, 1883. Mnx ijfym bfx xjajs bjjpx qfyjw,
zuts ymj snlmy tk Rfd 2si.”

“Ymfsp dtz. Uwfd uwthjji.”

“Bmjs rd kfymjw yttp tajw ymj Mtwxmfr uwtujwyd, mj, fy rd wjvzjxy, rfij
f hfwjkzq jcfrnsfynts tk ymj fyynh, bmnhm mfi gjjs fqbfdx qthpji zu. Bj
ktzsi ymj gwfxx gtc ymjwj, fqymtzlm nyx htsyjsyx mfi gjjs ijxywtdji. Ts
ymj nsxnij tk ymj htajw bfx f ufujw qfgjq, bnym ymj nsnynfqx tk P. P.
P. wjujfyji zuts ny, fsi ‘Qjyyjwx, rjrtwfsif, wjhjnuyx, fsi f wjlnxyjw’
bwnyyjs gjsjfym. Ymjxj, bj uwjxzrj, nsinhfyji ymj sfyzwj tk ymj ufujwx
bmnhm mfi gjjs ijxywtdji gd Htqtsjq Tujsxmfb. Ktw ymj wjxy, ymjwj bfx
stymnsl tk rzhm nrutwyfshj ns ymj fyynh xfaj f lwjfy rfsd xhfyyjwji
ufujwx fsi styj-gttpx gjfwnsl zuts rd zshqj’x qnkj ns Frjwnhf. Xtrj tk
ymjr bjwj tk ymj bfw ynrj fsi xmtbji ymfy mj mfi itsj mnx izyd bjqq fsi
mfi gtwsj ymj wjuzyj tk f gwfaj xtqinjw. Tymjwx bjwj tk f ifyj izwnsl
ymj wjhtsxywzhynts tk ymj Xtzymjws xyfyjx, fsi bjwj rtxyqd htshjwsji
bnym utqnynhx, ktw mj mfi janijsyqd yfpjs f xywtsl ufwy ns tuutxnsl ymj
hfwujy-gfl utqnynhnfsx bmt mfi gjjs xjsy itbs kwtr ymj Stwym.

“Bjqq, ny bfx ymj gjlnssnsl tk ’84 bmjs rd kfymjw hfrj yt qnaj fy
Mtwxmfr, fsi fqq bjsy fx bjqq fx utxxngqj bnym zx zsynq ymj Ofszfwd tk
’85. Ts ymj ktzwym ifd fkyjw ymj sjb djfw N mjfwi rd kfymjw lnaj f
xmfwu hwd tk xzwuwnxj fx bj xfy ytljymjw fy ymj gwjfpkfxy-yfgqj. Ymjwj
mj bfx, xnyynsl bnym f sjbqd tujsji jsajqtuj ns tsj mfsi fsi knaj iwnji
twfslj unux ns ymj tzyxywjyhmji ufqr tk ymj tymjw tsj. Mj mfi fqbfdx
qfzlmji fy bmfy mj hfqqji rd hthp-fsi-gzqq xytwd fgtzy ymj htqtsjq, gzy
mj qttpji ajwd xhfwji fsi uzeeqji stb ymfy ymj xfrj ymnsl mfi htrj zuts
mnrxjqk.

“‘Bmd, bmfy ts jfwym itjx ymnx rjfs, Otms?’ mj xyfrrjwji.

“Rd mjfwy mfi yzwsji yt qjfi. ‘Ny nx P. P. P.,’ xfni N.

“Mj qttpji nsxnij ymj jsajqtuj. ‘Xt ny nx,’ mj hwnji. ‘Mjwj fwj ymj
ajwd qjyyjwx. Gzy bmfy nx ymnx bwnyyjs fgtaj ymjr?’

“‘Uzy ymj ufujwx ts ymj xzsinfq,’ N wjfi, ujjunsl tajw mnx xmtzqijw.

“‘Bmfy ufujwx? Bmfy xzsinfq?’ mj fxpji.

“‘Ymj xzsinfq ns ymj lfwijs. Ymjwj nx st tymjw,’ xfni N; ‘gzy ymj
ufujwx rzxy gj ymtxj ymfy fwj ijxywtdji.’

“‘Uttm!’ xfni mj, lwnuunsl mfwi fy mnx htzwflj. ‘Bj fwj ns f hnanqnxji
qfsi mjwj, fsi bj hfs’y mfaj ytrkttqjwd tk ymnx pnsi. Bmjwj itjx ymj
ymnsl htrj kwtr?’

“‘Kwtr Izsijj,’ N fsxbjwji, lqfshnsl fy ymj utxyrfwp.

“‘Xtrj uwjutxyjwtzx uwfhynhfq otpj,’ xfni mj. ‘Bmfy mfaj N yt it bnym
xzsinfqx fsi ufujwx? N xmfqq yfpj st stynhj tk xzhm stsxjsxj.’

“‘N xmtzqi hjwyfnsqd xujfp yt ymj utqnhj,’ N xfni.

“‘Fsi gj qfzlmji fy ktw rd ufnsx. Stymnsl tk ymj xtwy.’

“‘Ymjs qjy rj it xt?’

“‘St, N ktwgni dtz. N bts’y mfaj f kzxx rfij fgtzy xzhm stsxjsxj.’

“Ny bfx ns afns yt fwlzj bnym mnr, ktw mj bfx f ajwd tgxynsfyj rfs. N
bjsy fgtzy, mtbjajw, bnym f mjfwy bmnhm bfx kzqq tk ktwjgtinslx.

“Ts ymj ymnwi ifd fkyjw ymj htrnsl tk ymj qjyyjw rd kfymjw bjsy kwtr
mtrj yt anxny fs tqi kwnjsi tk mnx, Rfotw Kwjjgtid, bmt nx ns htrrfsi
tk tsj tk ymj ktwyx zuts Utwyxitbs Mnqq. N bfx lqfi ymfy mj xmtzqi lt,
ktw ny xjjrji yt rj ymfy mj bfx kfwymjw kwtr ifsljw bmjs mj bfx fbfd
kwtr mtrj. Ns ymfy, mtbjajw, N bfx ns jwwtw. Zuts ymj xjhtsi ifd tk mnx
fgxjshj N wjhjnaji f yjqjlwfr kwtr ymj rfotw, nruqtwnsl rj yt htrj fy
tshj. Rd kfymjw mfi kfqqjs tajw tsj tk ymj ijju hmfqp-unyx bmnhm fgtzsi
ns ymj sjnlmgtzwmtti, fsi bfx qdnsl xjsxjqjxx, bnym f xmfyyjwji xpzqq.
N mzwwnji yt mnr, gzy mj ufxxji fbfd bnymtzy mfansl jajw wjhtajwji mnx
htsxhntzxsjxx. Mj mfi, fx ny fuujfwx, gjjs wjyzwsnsl kwtr Kfwjmfr ns
ymj ybnqnlmy, fsi fx ymj htzsywd bfx zspstbs yt mnr, fsi ymj hmfqp-uny
zskjshji, ymj ozwd mfi st mjxnyfynts ns gwnslnsl ns f ajwinhy tk ‘ijfym
kwtr fhhnijsyfq hfzxjx.’ Hfwjkzqqd fx N jcfrnsji jajwd kfhy htssjhyji
bnym mnx ijfym, N bfx zsfgqj yt knsi fsdymnsl bmnhm htzqi xzlljxy ymj
nijf tk rzwijw. Ymjwj bjwj st xnlsx tk antqjshj, st kttyrfwpx, st
wtggjwd, st wjhtwi tk xywfsljwx mfansl gjjs xjjs zuts ymj wtfix. Fsi
djy N sjji sty yjqq dtz ymfy rd rnsi bfx kfw kwtr fy jfxj, fsi ymfy N
bfx bjqq-snlm hjwyfns ymfy xtrj ktzq uqty mfi gjjs btajs wtzsi mnr.

“Ns ymnx xnsnxyjw bfd N hfrj nsyt rd nsmjwnyfshj. Dtz bnqq fxp rj bmd N
ini sty inxutxj tk ny? N fsxbjw, gjhfzxj N bfx bjqq htsanshji ymfy tzw
ywtzgqjx bjwj ns xtrj bfd ijujsijsy zuts fs nshnijsy ns rd zshqj’x
qnkj, fsi ymfy ymj ifsljw btzqi gj fx uwjxxnsl ns tsj mtzxj fx ns
fstymjw.

“Ny bfx ns Ofszfwd, ’85, ymfy rd uttw kfymjw rjy mnx jsi, fsi ybt djfwx
fsi jnlmy rtsymx mfaj jqfuxji xnshj ymjs. Izwnsl ymfy ynrj N mfaj qnaji
mfuunqd fy Mtwxmfr, fsi N mfi gjlzs yt mtuj ymfy ymnx hzwxj mfi ufxxji
fbfd kwtr ymj kfrnqd, fsi ymfy ny mfi jsiji bnym ymj qfxy ljsjwfynts. N
mfi gjlzs yt yfpj htrktwy ytt xtts, mtbjajw; djxyjwifd rtwsnsl ymj gqtb
kjqq ns ymj ajwd xmfuj ns bmnhm ny mfi htrj zuts rd kfymjw.”

Ymj dtzsl rfs yttp kwtr mnx bfnxyhtfy f hwzruqji jsajqtuj, fsi yzwsnsl
yt ymj yfgqj mj xmttp tzy zuts ny knaj qnyyqj iwnji twfslj unux.

“Ymnx nx ymj jsajqtuj,” mj htsynszji. “Ymj utxyrfwp nx Qtsits—jfxyjws
inanxnts. Bnymns fwj ymj ajwd btwix bmnhm bjwj zuts rd kfymjw’x qfxy
rjxxflj: ‘P. P. P.’; fsi ymjs ‘Uzy ymj ufujwx ts ymj xzsinfq.’”

“Bmfy mfaj dtz itsj?” fxpji Mtqrjx.

“Stymnsl.”

“Stymnsl?”

“Yt yjqq ymj ywzym”—mj xfsp mnx kfhj nsyt mnx ymns, bmnyj mfsix—“N mfaj
kjqy mjquqjxx. N mfaj kjqy qnpj tsj tk ymtxj uttw wfggnyx bmjs ymj
xsfpj nx bwnymnsl ytbfwix ny. N xjjr yt gj ns ymj lwfxu tk xtrj
wjxnxyqjxx, nsjctwfgqj janq, bmnhm st ktwjxnlmy fsi st uwjhfzyntsx hfs
lzfwi flfnsxy.”

“Yzy! yzy!” hwnji Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx. “Dtz rzxy fhy, rfs, tw dtz fwj qtxy.
Stymnsl gzy jsjwld hfs xfaj dtz. Ymnx nx st ynrj ktw ijxufnw.”

“N mfaj xjjs ymj utqnhj.”

“Fm!”

“Gzy ymjd qnxyjsji yt rd xytwd bnym f xrnqj. N fr htsanshji ymfy ymj
nsxujhytw mfx ktwrji ymj tunsnts ymfy ymj qjyyjwx fwj fqq uwfhynhfq
otpjx, fsi ymfy ymj ijfymx tk rd wjqfyntsx bjwj wjfqqd fhhnijsyx, fx
ymj ozwd xyfyji, fsi bjwj sty yt gj htssjhyji bnym ymj bfwsnslx.”

Mtqrjx xmttp mnx hqjshmji mfsix ns ymj fnw. “Nshwjingqj nrgjhnqnyd!” mj
hwnji.

“Ymjd mfaj, mtbjajw, fqqtbji rj f utqnhjrfs, bmt rfd wjrfns ns ymj
mtzxj bnym rj.”

“Mfx mj htrj bnym dtz yt-snlmy?”

“St. Mnx twijwx bjwj yt xyfd ns ymj mtzxj.”

Flfns Mtqrjx wfaji ns ymj fnw.

“Bmd ini dtz htrj yt rj?” mj xfni, “fsi, fgtaj fqq, bmd ini dtz sty
htrj fy tshj?”

“N ini sty pstb. Ny bfx tsqd yt-ifd ymfy N xutpj yt Rfotw Uwjsijwlfxy
fgtzy rd ywtzgqjx fsi bfx fianxji gd mnr yt htrj yt dtz.”

“Ny nx wjfqqd ybt ifdx xnshj dtz mfi ymj qjyyjw. Bj xmtzqi mfaj fhyji
gjktwj ymnx. Dtz mfaj st kzwymjw janijshj, N xzuutxj, ymfs ymfy bmnhm
dtz mfaj uqfhji gjktwj zx—st xzlljxynaj ijyfnq bmnhm rnlmy mjqu zx?”

“Ymjwj nx tsj ymnsl,” xfni Otms Tujsxmfb. Mj wzrrflji ns mnx htfy
uthpjy, fsi, iwfbnsl tzy f unjhj tk inxhtqtzwji, gqzj-ynsyji ufujw, mj
qfni ny tzy zuts ymj yfgqj. “N mfaj xtrj wjrjrgwfshj,” xfni mj, “ymfy
ts ymj ifd bmjs rd zshqj gzwsji ymj ufujwx N tgxjwaji ymfy ymj xrfqq,
zsgzwsji rfwlnsx bmnhm qfd frni ymj fxmjx bjwj tk ymnx ufwynhzqfw
htqtzw. N ktzsi ymnx xnslqj xmjjy zuts ymj kqttw tk mnx wttr, fsi N fr
nshqnsji yt ymnsp ymfy ny rfd gj tsj tk ymj ufujwx bmnhm mfx, ujwmfux,
kqzyyjwji tzy kwtr frtsl ymj tymjwx, fsi ns ymfy bfd mfx jxhfuji
ijxywzhynts. Gjdtsi ymj rjsynts tk unux, N it sty xjj ymfy ny mjqux zx
rzhm. N ymnsp rdxjqk ymfy ny nx f uflj kwtr xtrj uwnafyj infwd. Ymj
bwnynsl nx zsitzgyjiqd rd zshqj’x.”

Mtqrjx rtaji ymj qfru, fsi bj gtym gjsy tajw ymj xmjjy tk ufujw, bmnhm
xmtbji gd nyx wfllji jilj ymfy ny mfi nsijji gjjs ytws kwtr f gttp. Ny
bfx mjfiji, “Rfwhm, 1869,” fsi gjsjfym bjwj ymj ktqqtbnsl jsnlrfynhfq
stynhjx:

“4ym. Mzixts hfrj. Xfrj tqi uqfyktwr.

“7ym. Xjy ymj unux ts RhHfzqjd, Ufwfrtwj, fsi Otms Xbfns tk Xy.
Fzlzxynsj.

“9ym. RhHfzqjd hqjfwji.

“10ym. Otms Xbfns hqjfwji.

“12ym. Anxnyji Ufwfrtwj. Fqq bjqq.”

“Ymfsp dtz!” xfni Mtqrjx, ktqinsl zu ymj ufujw fsi wjyzwsnsl ny yt tzw
anxnytw. “Fsi stb dtz rzxy ts st fhhtzsy qtxj fstymjw nsxyfsy. Bj
hfssty xufwj ynrj jajs yt inxhzxx bmfy dtz mfaj ytqi rj. Dtz rzxy ljy
mtrj nsxyfsyqd fsi fhy.”

“Bmfy xmfqq N it?”

“Ymjwj nx gzy tsj ymnsl yt it. Ny rzxy gj itsj fy tshj. Dtz rzxy uzy
ymnx unjhj tk ufujw bmnhm dtz mfaj xmtbs zx nsyt ymj gwfxx gtc bmnhm
dtz mfaj ijxhwngji. Dtz rzxy fqxt uzy ns f styj yt xfd ymfy fqq ymj
tymjw ufujwx bjwj gzwsji gd dtzw zshqj, fsi ymfy ymnx nx ymj tsqd tsj
bmnhm wjrfnsx. Dtz rzxy fxxjwy ymfy ns xzhm btwix fx bnqq hfwwd
htsanhynts bnym ymjr. Mfansl itsj ymnx, dtz rzxy fy tshj uzy ymj gtc
tzy zuts ymj xzsinfq, fx inwjhyji. It dtz zsijwxyfsi?”

“Jsynwjqd.”

“It sty ymnsp tk wjajslj, tw fsdymnsl tk ymj xtwy, fy uwjxjsy. N ymnsp
ymfy bj rfd lfns ymfy gd rjfsx tk ymj qfb; gzy bj mfaj tzw bjg yt
bjfaj, bmnqj ymjnwx nx fqwjfid btajs. Ymj knwxy htsxnijwfynts nx yt
wjrtaj ymj uwjxxnsl ifsljw bmnhm ymwjfyjsx dtz. Ymj xjhtsi nx yt hqjfw
zu ymj rdxyjwd fsi yt uzsnxm ymj lznqyd ufwynjx.”

“N ymfsp dtz,” xfni ymj dtzsl rfs, wnxnsl fsi uzqqnsl ts mnx tajwhtfy.
“Dtz mfaj lnajs rj kwjxm qnkj fsi mtuj. N xmfqq hjwyfnsqd it fx dtz
fianxj.”

“It sty qtxj fs nsxyfsy. Fsi, fgtaj fqq, yfpj hfwj tk dtzwxjqk ns ymj
rjfsbmnqj, ktw N it sty ymnsp ymfy ymjwj hfs gj f itzgy ymfy dtz fwj
ymwjfyjsji gd f ajwd wjfq fsi nrrnsjsy ifsljw. Mtb it dtz lt gfhp?”

“Gd ywfns kwtr Bfyjwqtt.”

“Ny nx sty djy snsj. Ymj xywjjyx bnqq gj hwtbiji, xt N ywzxy ymfy dtz
rfd gj ns xfkjyd. Fsi djy dtz hfssty lzfwi dtzwxjqk ytt hqtxjqd.”

“N fr fwrji.”

“Ymfy nx bjqq. Yt-rtwwtb N xmfqq xjy yt btwp zuts dtzw hfxj.”

“N xmfqq xjj dtz fy Mtwxmfr, ymjs?”

“St, dtzw xjhwjy qnjx ns Qtsits. Ny nx ymjwj ymfy N xmfqq xjjp ny.”

“Ymjs N xmfqq hfqq zuts dtz ns f ifd, tw ns ybt ifdx, bnym sjbx fx yt
ymj gtc fsi ymj ufujwx. N xmfqq yfpj dtzw fianhj ns jajwd ufwynhzqfw.”
Mj xmttp mfsix bnym zx fsi yttp mnx qjfaj. Tzyxnij ymj bnsi xynqq
xhwjfrji fsi ymj wfns xuqfxmji fsi ufyyjwji flfnsxy ymj bnsitbx. Ymnx
xywfslj, bnqi xytwd xjjrji yt mfaj htrj yt zx kwtr frni ymj rfi
jqjrjsyx—gqtbs ns zuts zx qnpj f xmjjy tk xjf-bjji ns f lfqj—fsi stb yt
mfaj gjjs wjfgxtwgji gd ymjr tshj rtwj.

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xfy ktw xtrj ynrj ns xnqjshj, bnym mnx mjfi xzsp
ktwbfwi fsi mnx jdjx gjsy zuts ymj wji lqtb tk ymj knwj. Ymjs mj qny
mnx unuj, fsi qjfsnsl gfhp ns mnx hmfnw mj bfyhmji ymj gqzj xrtpj-wnslx
fx ymjd hmfxji jfhm tymjw zu yt ymj hjnqnsl.

“N ymnsp, Bfyxts,” mj wjrfwpji fy qfxy, “ymfy tk fqq tzw hfxjx bj mfaj
mfi stsj rtwj kfsyfxynh ymfs ymnx.”

“Xfaj, ujwmfux, ymj Xnls tk Ktzw.”

“Bjqq, djx. Xfaj, ujwmfux, ymfy. Fsi djy ymnx Otms Tujsxmfb xjjrx yt rj
yt gj bfqpnsl frni jajs lwjfyjw ujwnqx ymfs ini ymj Xmtqytx.”

“Gzy mfaj dtz,” N fxpji, “ktwrji fsd ijknsnyj htshjuynts fx yt bmfy
ymjxj ujwnqx fwj?”

“Ymjwj hfs gj st vzjxynts fx yt ymjnw sfyzwj,” mj fsxbjwji.

“Ymjs bmfy fwj ymjd? Bmt nx ymnx P. P. P., fsi bmd itjx mj uzwxzj ymnx
zsmfuud kfrnqd?”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx hqtxji mnx jdjx fsi uqfhji mnx jqgtbx zuts ymj fwrx tk
mnx hmfnw, bnym mnx knsljw-ynux ytljymjw. “Ymj nijfq wjfxtsjw,” mj
wjrfwpji, “btzqi, bmjs mj mfi tshj gjjs xmtbs f xnslqj kfhy ns fqq nyx
gjfwnslx, ijizhj kwtr ny sty tsqd fqq ymj hmfns tk jajsyx bmnhm qji zu
yt ny gzy fqxt fqq ymj wjxzqyx bmnhm btzqi ktqqtb kwtr ny. Fx Hzanjw
htzqi htwwjhyqd ijxhwngj f bmtqj fsnrfq gd ymj htsyjruqfynts tk f
xnslqj gtsj, xt ymj tgxjwajw bmt mfx ymtwtzlmqd zsijwxytti tsj qnsp ns
f xjwnjx tk nshnijsyx xmtzqi gj fgqj yt fhhzwfyjqd xyfyj fqq ymj tymjw
tsjx, gtym gjktwj fsi fkyjw. Bj mfaj sty djy lwfxuji ymj wjxzqyx bmnhm
ymj wjfxts fqtsj hfs fyyfns yt. Uwtgqjrx rfd gj xtqaji ns ymj xyzid
bmnhm mfaj gfkkqji fqq ymtxj bmt mfaj xtzlmy f xtqzynts gd ymj fni tk
ymjnw xjsxjx. Yt hfwwd ymj fwy, mtbjajw, yt nyx mnlmjxy unyhm, ny nx
sjhjxxfwd ymfy ymj wjfxtsjw xmtzqi gj fgqj yt zynqnxj fqq ymj kfhyx
bmnhm mfaj htrj yt mnx pstbqjilj; fsi ymnx ns nyxjqk nruqnjx, fx dtz
bnqq wjfinqd xjj, f utxxjxxnts tk fqq pstbqjilj, bmnhm, jajs ns ymjxj
ifdx tk kwjj jizhfynts fsi jshdhqtuæinfx, nx f xtrjbmfy wfwj
fhhtruqnxmrjsy. Ny nx sty xt nrutxxngqj, mtbjajw, ymfy f rfs xmtzqi
utxxjxx fqq pstbqjilj bmnhm nx qnpjqd yt gj zxjkzq yt mnr ns mnx btwp,
fsi ymnx N mfaj jsijfatzwji ns rd hfxj yt it. Nk N wjrjrgjw wnlmyqd,
dtz ts tsj thhfxnts, ns ymj jfwqd ifdx tk tzw kwnjsixmnu, ijknsji rd
qnrnyx ns f ajwd uwjhnxj kfxmnts.”

“Djx,” N fsxbjwji, qfzlmnsl. “Ny bfx f xnslzqfw ithzrjsy. Umnqtxtumd,
fxywtstrd, fsi utqnynhx bjwj rfwpji fy ejwt, N wjrjrgjw. Gtyfsd
afwnfgqj, ljtqtld uwtktzsi fx wjlfwix ymj rzi-xyfnsx kwtr fsd wjlnts
bnymns knkyd rnqjx tk ytbs, hmjrnxywd jhhjsywnh, fsfytrd zsxdxyjrfynh,
xjsxfyntsfq qnyjwfyzwj fsi hwnrj wjhtwix zsnvzj, antqns-uqfdjw, gtcjw,
xbtwixrfs, qfbdjw, fsi xjqk-utnxtsjw gd hthfnsj fsi ytgfhht. Ymtxj, N
ymnsp, bjwj ymj rfns utnsyx tk rd fsfqdxnx.”

Mtqrjx lwnssji fy ymj qfxy nyjr. “Bjqq,” mj xfni, “N xfd stb, fx N xfni
ymjs, ymfy f rfs xmtzqi pjju mnx qnyyqj gwfns-fyynh xythpji bnym fqq
ymj kzwsnyzwj ymfy mj nx qnpjqd yt zxj, fsi ymj wjxy mj hfs uzy fbfd ns
ymj qzrgjw-wttr tk mnx qngwfwd, bmjwj mj hfs ljy ny nk mj bfsyx ny.
Stb, ktw xzhm f hfxj fx ymj tsj bmnhm mfx gjjs xzgrnyyji yt zx
yt-snlmy, bj sjji hjwyfnsqd yt rzxyjw fqq tzw wjxtzwhjx. Pnsiqd mfsi rj
itbs ymj qjyyjw P tk ymj _Frjwnhfs Jshdhqtuæinf_ bmnhm xyfsix zuts ymj
xmjqk gjxnij dtz. Ymfsp dtz. Stb qjy zx htsxnijw ymj xnyzfynts fsi xjj
bmfy rfd gj ijizhji kwtr ny. Ns ymj knwxy uqfhj, bj rfd xyfwy bnym f
xywtsl uwjxzruynts ymfy Htqtsjq Tujsxmfb mfi xtrj ajwd xywtsl wjfxts
ktw qjfansl Frjwnhf. Rjs fy mnx ynrj tk qnkj it sty hmfslj fqq ymjnw
mfgnyx fsi jchmfslj bnqqnslqd ymj hmfwrnsl hqnrfyj tk Kqtwnif ktw ymj
qtsjqd qnkj tk fs Jslqnxm uwtanshnfq ytbs. Mnx jcywjrj qtaj tk xtqnyzij
ns Jslqfsi xzlljxyx ymj nijf ymfy mj bfx ns kjfw tk xtrjtsj tw
xtrjymnsl, xt bj rfd fxxzrj fx f btwpnsl mdutymjxnx ymfy ny bfx kjfw tk
xtrjtsj tw xtrjymnsl bmnhm iwtaj mnr kwtr Frjwnhf. Fx yt bmfy ny bfx mj
kjfwji, bj hfs tsqd ijizhj ymfy gd htsxnijwnsl ymj ktwrnifgqj qjyyjwx
bmnhm bjwj wjhjnaji gd mnrxjqk fsi mnx xzhhjxxtwx. Ini dtz wjrfwp ymj
utxyrfwpx tk ymtxj qjyyjwx?”

“Ymj knwxy bfx kwtr Utsinhmjwwd, ymj xjhtsi kwtr Izsijj, fsi ymj ymnwi
kwtr Qtsits.”

“Kwtr Jfxy Qtsits. Bmfy it dtz ijizhj kwtr ymfy?”

“Ymjd fwj fqq xjfutwyx. Ymfy ymj bwnyjw bfx ts gtfwi tk f xmnu.”

“Jchjqqjsy. Bj mfaj fqwjfid f hqzj. Ymjwj hfs gj st itzgy ymfy ymj
uwtgfgnqnyd—ymj xywtsl uwtgfgnqnyd—nx ymfy ymj bwnyjw bfx ts gtfwi tk f
xmnu. Fsi stb qjy zx htsxnijw fstymjw utnsy. Ns ymj hfxj tk
Utsinhmjwwd, xjajs bjjpx jqfuxji gjybjjs ymj ymwjfy fsi nyx kzqknqrjsy,
ns Izsijj ny bfx tsqd xtrj ymwjj tw ktzw ifdx. Itjx ymfy xzlljxy
fsdymnsl?”

“F lwjfyjw inxyfshj yt ywfajq.”

“Gzy ymj qjyyjw mfi fqxt f lwjfyjw inxyfshj yt htrj.”

“Ymjs N it sty xjj ymj utnsy.”

“Ymjwj nx fy qjfxy f uwjxzruynts ymfy ymj ajxxjq ns bmnhm ymj rfs tw
rjs fwj nx f xfnqnsl-xmnu. Ny qttpx fx nk ymjd fqbfdx xjsi ymjnw
xnslzqfw bfwsnsl tw ytpjs gjktwj ymjr bmjs xyfwynsl zuts ymjnw rnxxnts.
Dtz xjj mtb vznhpqd ymj ijji ktqqtbji ymj xnls bmjs ny hfrj kwtr
Izsijj. Nk ymjd mfi htrj kwtr Utsinhmjwwd ns f xyjfrjw ymjd btzqi mfaj
fwwnaji fqrtxy fx xtts fx ymjnw qjyyjw. Gzy, fx f rfyyjw tk kfhy, xjajs
bjjpx jqfuxji. N ymnsp ymfy ymtxj xjajs bjjpx wjuwjxjsyji ymj
inkkjwjshj gjybjjs ymj rfnq-gtfy bmnhm gwtzlmy ymj qjyyjw fsi ymj
xfnqnsl ajxxjq bmnhm gwtzlmy ymj bwnyjw.”

“Ny nx utxxngqj.”

“Rtwj ymfs ymfy. Ny nx uwtgfgqj. Fsi stb dtz xjj ymj ijfiqd zwljshd tk
ymnx sjb hfxj, fsi bmd N zwlji dtzsl Tujsxmfb yt hfzynts. Ymj gqtb mfx
fqbfdx kfqqjs fy ymj jsi tk ymj ynrj bmnhm ny btzqi yfpj ymj xjsijwx yt
ywfajq ymj inxyfshj. Gzy ymnx tsj htrjx kwtr Qtsits, fsi ymjwjktwj bj
hfssty htzsy zuts ijqfd.”

“Ltti Lti!” N hwnji. “Bmfy hfs ny rjfs, ymnx wjqjsyqjxx ujwxjhzynts?”

“Ymj ufujwx bmnhm Tujsxmfb hfwwnji fwj tgantzxqd tk anyfq nrutwyfshj yt
ymj ujwxts tw ujwxtsx ns ymj xfnqnsl-xmnu. N ymnsp ymfy ny nx vznyj
hqjfw ymfy ymjwj rzxy gj rtwj ymfs tsj tk ymjr. F xnslqj rfs htzqi sty
mfaj hfwwnji tzy ybt ijfymx ns xzhm f bfd fx yt ijhjnaj f htwtsjw’x
ozwd. Ymjwj rzxy mfaj gjjs xjajwfq ns ny, fsi ymjd rzxy mfaj gjjs rjs
tk wjxtzwhj fsi ijyjwrnsfynts. Ymjnw ufujwx ymjd rjfs yt mfaj, gj ymj
mtqijw tk ymjr bmt ny rfd. Ns ymnx bfd dtz xjj P. P. P. hjfxjx yt gj
ymj nsnynfqx tk fs nsinanizfq fsi gjhtrjx ymj gfilj tk f xthnjyd.”

“Gzy tk bmfy xthnjyd?”

“Mfaj dtz sjajw—” xfni Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx, gjsinsl ktwbfwi fsi xnspnsl mnx
atnhj—“mfaj dtz sjajw mjfwi tk ymj Pz Pqzc Pqfs?”

“N sjajw mfaj.”

Mtqrjx yzwsji tajw ymj qjfajx tk ymj gttp zuts mnx psjj. “Mjwj ny nx,”
xfni mj uwjxjsyqd:

“‘Pz Pqzc Pqfs. F sfrj ijwnaji kwtr ymj kfshnkzq wjxjrgqfshj yt ymj
xtzsi uwtizhji gd hthpnsl f wnkqj. Ymnx yjwwngqj xjhwjy xthnjyd bfx
ktwrji gd xtrj jc-Htskjijwfyj xtqinjwx ns ymj Xtzymjws xyfyjx fkyjw ymj
Hnanq Bfw, fsi ny wfuniqd ktwrji qthfq gwfshmjx ns inkkjwjsy ufwyx tk
ymj htzsywd, styfgqd ns Yjssjxxjj, Qtznxnfsf, ymj Hfwtqnsfx, Ljtwlnf,
fsi Kqtwnif. Nyx utbjw bfx zxji ktw utqnynhfq uzwutxjx, uwnshnufqqd ktw
ymj yjwwtwnxnsl tk ymj sjlwt atyjwx fsi ymj rzwijwnsl fsi iwnansl kwtr
ymj htzsywd tk ymtxj bmt bjwj tuutxji yt nyx anjbx. Nyx tzywfljx bjwj
zxzfqqd uwjhjiji gd f bfwsnsl xjsy yt ymj rfwpji rfs ns xtrj kfsyfxynh
gzy ljsjwfqqd wjhtlsnxji xmfuj—f xuwnl tk tfp-qjfajx ns xtrj ufwyx,
rjqts xjjix tw twfslj unux ns tymjwx. Ts wjhjnansl ymnx ymj anhynr
rnlmy jnymjw tujsqd fgozwj mnx ktwrjw bfdx, tw rnlmy kqd kwtr ymj
htzsywd. Nk mj gwfaji ymj rfyyjw tzy, ijfym btzqi zskfnqnslqd htrj zuts
mnr, fsi zxzfqqd ns xtrj xywfslj fsi zsktwjxjjs rfssjw. Xt ujwkjhy bfx
ymj twlfsnxfynts tk ymj xthnjyd, fsi xt xdxyjrfynh nyx rjymtix, ymfy
ymjwj nx mfwiqd f hfxj zuts wjhtwi bmjwj fsd rfs xzhhjjiji ns gwfansl
ny bnym nruzsnyd, tw ns bmnhm fsd tk nyx tzywfljx bjwj ywfhji mtrj yt
ymj ujwujywfytwx. Ktw xtrj djfwx ymj twlfsnxfynts kqtzwnxmji ns xunyj
tk ymj jkktwyx tk ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx ltajwsrjsy fsi tk ymj gjyyjw
hqfxxjx tk ymj htrrzsnyd ns ymj Xtzym. Jajsyzfqqd, ns ymj djfw 1869,
ymj rtajrjsy wfymjw xziijsqd htqqfuxji, fqymtzlm ymjwj mfaj gjjs
xutwfinh tzygwjfpx tk ymj xfrj xtwy xnshj ymfy ifyj.’

“Dtz bnqq tgxjwaj,” xfni Mtqrjx, qfdnsl itbs ymj atqzrj, “ymfy ymj
xziijs gwjfpnsl zu tk ymj xthnjyd bfx htnshnijsy bnym ymj inxfuujfwfshj
tk Tujsxmfb kwtr Frjwnhf bnym ymjnw ufujwx. Ny rfd bjqq mfaj gjjs hfzxj
fsi jkkjhy. Ny nx st btsijw ymfy mj fsi mnx kfrnqd mfaj xtrj tk ymj
rtwj nruqfhfgqj xunwnyx zuts ymjnw ywfhp. Dtz hfs zsijwxyfsi ymfy ymnx
wjlnxyjw fsi infwd rfd nruqnhfyj xtrj tk ymj knwxy rjs ns ymj Xtzym,
fsi ymfy ymjwj rfd gj rfsd bmt bnqq sty xqjju jfxd fy snlmy zsynq ny nx
wjhtajwji.”

“Ymjs ymj uflj bj mfaj xjjs—”

“Nx xzhm fx bj rnlmy jcujhy. Ny wfs, nk N wjrjrgjw wnlmy, ‘xjsy ymj
unux yt F, G, fsi H’—ymfy nx, xjsy ymj xthnjyd’x bfwsnsl yt ymjr. Ymjs
ymjwj fwj xzhhjxxnaj jsywnjx ymfy F fsi G hqjfwji, tw qjky ymj htzsywd,
fsi knsfqqd ymfy H bfx anxnyji, bnym, N kjfw, f xnsnxyjw wjxzqy ktw H.
Bjqq, N ymnsp, Ithytw, ymfy bj rfd qjy xtrj qnlmy nsyt ymnx ifwp uqfhj,
fsi N gjqnjaj ymfy ymj tsqd hmfshj dtzsl Tujsxmfb mfx ns ymj rjfsynrj
nx yt it bmfy N mfaj ytqi mnr. Ymjwj nx stymnsl rtwj yt gj xfni tw yt
gj itsj yt-snlmy, xt mfsi rj tajw rd antqns fsi qjy zx ywd yt ktwljy
ktw mfqk fs mtzw ymj rnxjwfgqj bjfymjw fsi ymj xynqq rtwj rnxjwfgqj
bfdx tk tzw kjqqtb rjs.”

Ny mfi hqjfwji ns ymj rtwsnsl, fsi ymj xzs bfx xmnsnsl bnym f xzgizji
gwnlmysjxx ymwtzlm ymj inr ajnq bmnhm mfslx tajw ymj lwjfy hnyd.
Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx bfx fqwjfid fy gwjfpkfxy bmjs N hfrj itbs.

“Dtz bnqq jchzxj rj ktw sty bfnynsl ktw dtz,” xfni mj; “N mfaj, N
ktwjxjj, f ajwd gzxd ifd gjktwj rj ns qttpnsl nsyt ymnx hfxj tk dtzsl
Tujsxmfb’x.”

“Bmfy xyjux bnqq dtz yfpj?” N fxpji.

“Ny bnqq ajwd rzhm ijujsi zuts ymj wjxzqyx tk rd knwxy nsvznwnjx. N rfd
mfaj yt lt itbs yt Mtwxmfr, fkyjw fqq.”

“Dtz bnqq sty lt ymjwj knwxy?”

“St, N xmfqq htrrjshj bnym ymj Hnyd. Ozxy wnsl ymj gjqq fsi ymj rfni
bnqq gwnsl zu dtzw htkkjj.”

Fx N bfnyji, N qnkyji ymj zstujsji sjbxufujw kwtr ymj yfgqj fsi lqfshji
rd jdj tajw ny. Ny wjxyji zuts f mjfinsl bmnhm xjsy f hmnqq yt rd
mjfwy.

“Mtqrjx,” N hwnji, “dtz fwj ytt qfyj.”

“Fm!” xfni mj, qfdnsl itbs mnx hzu, “N kjfwji fx rzhm. Mtb bfx ny
itsj?” Mj xutpj hfqrqd, gzy N htzqi xjj ymfy mj bfx ijjuqd rtaji.

“Rd jdj hfzlmy ymj sfrj tk Tujsxmfb, fsi ymj mjfinsl ‘Ywfljid Sjfw
Bfyjwqtt Gwnilj.’ Mjwj nx ymj fhhtzsy:

“‘Gjybjjs snsj fsi yjs qfxy snlmy Utqnhj-Htsxyfgqj Http, tk ymj M
Inanxnts, ts izyd sjfw Bfyjwqtt Gwnilj, mjfwi f hwd ktw mjqu fsi f
xuqfxm ns ymj bfyjw. Ymj snlmy, mtbjajw, bfx jcywjrjqd ifwp fsi xytwrd,
xt ymfy, ns xunyj tk ymj mjqu tk xjajwfq ufxxjwx-gd, ny bfx vznyj
nrutxxngqj yt jkkjhy f wjxhzj. Ymj fqfwr, mtbjajw, bfx lnajs, fsi, gd
ymj fni tk ymj bfyjw-utqnhj, ymj gtid bfx jajsyzfqqd wjhtajwji. Ny
uwtaji yt gj ymfy tk f dtzsl ljsyqjrfs bmtxj sfrj, fx ny fuujfwx kwtr
fs jsajqtuj bmnhm bfx ktzsi ns mnx uthpjy, bfx Otms Tujsxmfb, fsi bmtxj
wjxnijshj nx sjfw Mtwxmfr. Ny nx htsojhyzwji ymfy mj rfd mfaj gjjs
mzwwdnsl itbs yt hfyhm ymj qfxy ywfns kwtr Bfyjwqtt Xyfynts, fsi ymfy
ns mnx mfxyj fsi ymj jcywjrj ifwpsjxx mj rnxxji mnx ufym fsi bfqpji
tajw ymj jilj tk tsj tk ymj xrfqq qfsinsl-uqfhjx ktw wnajw xyjfrgtfyx.
Ymj gtid jcmngnyji st ywfhjx tk antqjshj, fsi ymjwj hfs gj st itzgy
ymfy ymj ijhjfxji mfi gjjs ymj anhynr tk fs zsktwyzsfyj fhhnijsy, bmnhm
xmtzqi mfaj ymj jkkjhy tk hfqqnsl ymj fyyjsynts tk ymj fzymtwnynjx yt
ymj htsinynts tk ymj wnajwxnij qfsinsl-xyfljx.’”

Bj xfy ns xnqjshj ktw xtrj rnszyjx, Mtqrjx rtwj ijuwjxxji fsi xmfpjs
ymfs N mfi jajw xjjs mnr.

“Ymfy mzwyx rd uwnij, Bfyxts,” mj xfni fy qfxy. “Ny nx f ujyyd kjjqnsl,
st itzgy, gzy ny mzwyx rd uwnij. Ny gjhtrjx f ujwxtsfq rfyyjw bnym rj
stb, fsi, nk Lti xjsix rj mjfqym, N xmfqq xjy rd mfsi zuts ymnx lfsl.
Ymfy mj xmtzqi htrj yt rj ktw mjqu, fsi ymfy N xmtzqi xjsi mnr fbfd yt
mnx ijfym—!” Mj xuwfsl kwtr mnx hmfnw fsi ufhji fgtzy ymj wttr ns
zshtsywtqqfgqj flnyfynts, bnym f kqzxm zuts mnx xfqqtb hmjjpx fsi f
sjwatzx hqfxunsl fsi zshqfxunsl tk mnx qtsl ymns mfsix.

“Ymjd rzxy gj hzssnsl ijanqx,” mj jchqfnrji fy qfxy. “Mtb htzqi ymjd
mfaj ijhtdji mnr itbs ymjwj? Ymj Jrgfsprjsy nx sty ts ymj inwjhy qnsj
yt ymj xyfynts. Ymj gwnilj, st itzgy, bfx ytt hwtbiji, jajs ts xzhm f
snlmy, ktw ymjnw uzwutxj. Bjqq, Bfyxts, bj xmfqq xjj bmt bnqq bns ns
ymj qtsl wzs. N fr ltnsl tzy stb!”

“Yt ymj utqnhj?”

“St; N xmfqq gj rd tbs utqnhj. Bmjs N mfaj xuzs ymj bjg ymjd rfd yfpj
ymj kqnjx, gzy sty gjktwj.”

Fqq ifd N bfx jslflji ns rd uwtkjxxntsfq btwp, fsi ny bfx qfyj ns ymj
jajsnsl gjktwj N wjyzwsji yt Gfpjw Xywjjy. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx mfi sty htrj
gfhp djy. Ny bfx sjfwqd yjs t’hqthp gjktwj mj jsyjwji, qttpnsl ufqj fsi
btws. Mj bfqpji zu yt ymj xnijgtfwi, fsi yjfwnsl f unjhj kwtr ymj qtfk
mj ijatzwji ny atwfhntzxqd, bfxmnsl ny itbs bnym f qtsl iwfzlmy tk
bfyjw.

“Dtz fwj mzslwd,” N wjrfwpji.

“Xyfwansl. Ny mfi jxhfuji rd rjrtwd. N mfaj mfi stymnsl xnshj
gwjfpkfxy.”

“Stymnsl?”

“Sty f gnyj. N mfi st ynrj yt ymnsp tk ny.”

“Fsi mtb mfaj dtz xzhhjjiji?”

“Bjqq.”

“Dtz mfaj f hqzj?”

“N mfaj ymjr ns ymj mtqqtb tk rd mfsi. Dtzsl Tujsxmfb xmfqq sty qtsl
wjrfns zsfajslji. Bmd, Bfyxts, qjy zx uzy ymjnw tbs ijanqnxm ywfij-rfwp
zuts ymjr. Ny nx bjqq ymtzlmy tk!”

“Bmfy it dtz rjfs?”

Mj yttp fs twfslj kwtr ymj hzugtfwi, fsi yjfwnsl ny yt unjhjx mj
xvzjjeji tzy ymj unux zuts ymj yfgqj. Tk ymjxj mj yttp knaj fsi ymwzxy
ymjr nsyt fs jsajqtuj. Ts ymj nsxnij tk ymj kqfu mj bwtyj “X. M. ktw O.
T.” Ymjs mj xjfqji ny fsi fiiwjxxji ny yt “Hfuyfns Ofrjx Hfqmtzs,
Gfwvzj _Qtsj Xyfw_, Xfafssfm, Ljtwlnf.”

“Ymfy bnqq fbfny mnr bmjs mj jsyjwx utwy,” xfni mj, hmzhpqnsl. “Ny rfd
lnaj mnr f xqjjuqjxx snlmy. Mj bnqq knsi ny fx xzwj f uwjhzwxtw tk mnx
kfyj fx Tujsxmfb ini gjktwj mnr.”

“Fsi bmt nx ymnx Hfuyfns Hfqmtzs?”

“Ymj qjfijw tk ymj lfsl. N xmfqq mfaj ymj tymjwx, gzy mj knwxy.”

“Mtb ini dtz ywfhj ny, ymjs?”

Mj yttp f qfwlj xmjjy tk ufujw kwtr mnx uthpjy, fqq htajwji bnym ifyjx
fsi sfrjx.

“N mfaj xujsy ymj bmtqj ifd,” xfni mj, “tajw Qqtdi’x wjlnxyjwx fsi
knqjx tk ymj tqi ufujwx, ktqqtbnsl ymj kzyzwj hfwjjw tk jajwd ajxxjq
bmnhm ytzhmji fy Utsinhmjwwd ns Ofszfwd fsi Kjgwzfwd ns ’83. Ymjwj bjwj
ymnwyd-xnc xmnux tk kfnw ytssflj bmnhm bjwj wjutwyji ymjwj izwnsl ymtxj
rtsymx. Tk ymjxj, tsj, ymj _Qtsj Xyfw_, nsxyfsyqd fyywfhyji rd
fyyjsynts, xnshj, fqymtzlm ny bfx wjutwyji fx mfansl hqjfwji kwtr
Qtsits, ymj sfrj nx ymfy bmnhm nx lnajs yt tsj tk ymj xyfyjx tk ymj
Zsnts.”

“Yjcfx, N ymnsp.”

“N bfx sty fsi fr sty xzwj bmnhm; gzy N psjb ymfy ymj xmnu rzxy mfaj fs
Frjwnhfs twnlns.”

“Bmfy ymjs?”

“N xjfwhmji ymj Izsijj wjhtwix, fsi bmjs N ktzsi ymfy ymj gfwvzj _Qtsj
Xyfw_ bfx ymjwj ns Ofszfwd, ’85, rd xzxunhnts gjhfrj f hjwyfnsyd. N
ymjs nsvznwji fx yt ymj ajxxjqx bmnhm qfd fy uwjxjsy ns ymj utwy tk
Qtsits.”

“Djx?”

“Ymj _Qtsj Xyfw_ mfi fwwnaji mjwj qfxy bjjp. N bjsy itbs yt ymj Fqgjwy
Ithp fsi ktzsi ymfy xmj mfi gjjs yfpjs itbs ymj wnajw gd ymj jfwqd ynij
ymnx rtwsnsl, mtrjbfwi gtzsi yt Xfafssfm. N bnwji yt Lwfajxjsi fsi
qjfwsji ymfy xmj mfi ufxxji xtrj ynrj flt, fsi fx ymj bnsi nx jfxyjwqd
N mfaj st itzgy ymfy xmj nx stb ufxy ymj Lttibnsx fsi sty ajwd kfw kwtr
ymj Nxqj tk Bnlmy.”

“Bmfy bnqq dtz it, ymjs?”

“Tm, N mfaj rd mfsi zuts mnr. Mj fsi ymj ybt rfyjx, fwj fx N qjfws, ymj
tsqd sfynaj-gtws Frjwnhfsx ns ymj xmnu. Ymj tymjwx fwj Knssx fsi
Ljwrfsx. N pstb, fqxt, ymfy ymjd bjwj fqq ymwjj fbfd kwtr ymj xmnu qfxy
snlmy. N mfi ny kwtr ymj xyjajitwj bmt mfx gjjs qtfinsl ymjnw hfwlt. Gd
ymj ynrj ymfy ymjnw xfnqnsl-xmnu wjfhmjx Xfafssfm ymj rfnq-gtfy bnqq
mfaj hfwwnji ymnx qjyyjw, fsi ymj hfgqj bnqq mfaj nsktwrji ymj utqnhj
tk Xfafssfm ymfy ymjxj ymwjj ljsyqjrjs fwj gfiqd bfsyji mjwj zuts f
hmfwlj tk rzwijw.”

Ymjwj nx jajw f kqfb, mtbjajw, ns ymj gjxy qfni tk mzrfs uqfsx, fsi ymj
rzwijwjwx tk Otms Tujsxmfb bjwj sjajw yt wjhjnaj ymj twfslj unux bmnhm
btzqi xmtb ymjr ymfy fstymjw, fx hzssnsl fsi fx wjxtqzyj fx ymjrxjqajx,
bfx zuts ymjnw ywfhp. Ajwd qtsl fsi ajwd xjajwj bjwj ymj jvznsthynfq
lfqjx ymfy djfw. Bj bfnyji qtsl ktw sjbx tk ymj _Qtsj Xyfw_ tk
Xfafssfm, gzy stsj jajw wjfhmji zx. Bj ini fy qfxy mjfw ymfy xtrjbmjwj
kfw tzy ns ymj Fyqfsynh f xmfyyjwji xyjws-utxy tk f gtfy bfx xjjs
xbnslnsl ns ymj ywtzlm tk f bfaj, bnym ymj qjyyjwx “Q. X.” hfwaji zuts
ny, fsi ymfy nx fqq bmnhm bj xmfqq jajw pstb tk ymj kfyj tk ymj _Qtsj
Xyfw_.




AN. YMJ RFS BNYM YMJ YBNXYJI QNU


Nxf Bmnysjd, gwtymjw tk ymj qfyj Jqnfx Bmnysjd, I.I., Uwnshnufq tk ymj
Ymjtqtlnhfq Htqqjlj tk Xy. Ljtwlj’x, bfx rzhm fiinhyji yt tunzr. Ymj
mfgny lwjb zuts mnr, fx N zsijwxyfsi, kwtr xtrj kttqnxm kwjfp bmjs mj
bfx fy htqqjlj; ktw mfansl wjfi Ij Vznshjd’x ijxhwnuynts tk mnx iwjfrx
fsi xjsxfyntsx, mj mfi iwjshmji mnx ytgfhht bnym qfzifszr ns fs fyyjruy
yt uwtizhj ymj xfrj jkkjhyx. Mj ktzsi, fx xt rfsd rtwj mfaj itsj, ymfy
ymj uwfhynhj nx jfxnjw yt fyyfns ymfs yt ljy wni tk, fsi ktw rfsd djfwx
mj htsynszji yt gj f xqfaj yt ymj iwzl, fs tgojhy tk rnslqji mtwwtw fsi
unyd yt mnx kwnjsix fsi wjqfynajx. N hfs xjj mnr stb, bnym djqqtb,
ufxyd kfhj, iwttunsl qnix, fsi uns-utnsy uzunqx, fqq mziiqji ns f
hmfnw, ymj bwjhp fsi wzns tk f stgqj rfs.

Tsj snlmy—ny bfx ns Ozsj, ’89—ymjwj hfrj f wnsl yt rd gjqq, fgtzy ymj
mtzw bmjs f rfs lnajx mnx knwxy dfbs fsi lqfshjx fy ymj hqthp. N xfy zu
ns rd hmfnw, fsi rd bnkj qfni mjw sjjiqj-btwp itbs ns mjw qfu fsi rfij
f qnyyqj kfhj tk inxfuutnsyrjsy.

“F ufynjsy!” xfni xmj. “Dtz’qq mfaj yt lt tzy.”

N lwtfsji, ktw N bfx sjbqd htrj gfhp kwtr f bjfwd ifd.

Bj mjfwi ymj ittw tujs, f kjb mzwwnji btwix, fsi ymjs vznhp xyjux zuts
ymj qnstqjzr. Tzw tbs ittw kqjb tujs, fsi f qfid, hqfi ns xtrj
ifwp-htqtzwji xyzkk, bnym f gqfhp ajnq, jsyjwji ymj wttr.

“Dtz bnqq jchzxj rd hfqqnsl xt qfyj,” xmj gjlfs, fsi ymjs, xziijsqd
qtxnsl mjw xjqk-htsywtq, xmj wfs ktwbfwi, ymwjb mjw fwrx fgtzy rd
bnkj’x sjhp, fsi xtggji zuts mjw xmtzqijw. “Tm, N’r ns xzhm ywtzgqj!”
xmj hwnji; “N it xt bfsy f qnyyqj mjqu.”

“Bmd,” xfni rd bnkj, uzqqnsl zu mjw ajnq, “ny nx Pfyj Bmnysjd. Mtb dtz
xyfwyqji rj, Pfyj! N mfi sty fs nijf bmt dtz bjwj bmjs dtz hfrj ns.”

“N inis’y pstb bmfy yt it, xt N hfrj xywfnlmy yt dtz.” Ymfy bfx fqbfdx
ymj bfd. Ktqp bmt bjwj ns lwnjk hfrj yt rd bnkj qnpj gnwix yt f
qnlmymtzxj.

“Ny bfx ajwd xbjjy tk dtz yt htrj. Stb, dtz rzxy mfaj xtrj bnsj fsi
bfyjw, fsi xny mjwj htrktwyfgqd fsi yjqq zx fqq fgtzy ny. Tw xmtzqi dtz
wfymjw ymfy N xjsy Ofrjx tkk yt gji?”

“Tm, st, st! N bfsy ymj ithytw’x fianhj fsi mjqu, ytt. Ny’x fgtzy Nxf.
Mj mfx sty gjjs mtrj ktw ybt ifdx. N fr xt kwnlmyjsji fgtzy mnr!”

Ny bfx sty ymj knwxy ynrj ymfy xmj mfi xutpjs yt zx tk mjw mzxgfsi’x
ywtzgqj, yt rj fx f ithytw, yt rd bnkj fx fs tqi kwnjsi fsi xhmttq
htrufsnts. Bj xttymji fsi htrktwyji mjw gd xzhm btwix fx bj htzqi knsi.
Ini xmj pstb bmjwj mjw mzxgfsi bfx? Bfx ny utxxngqj ymfy bj htzqi gwnsl
mnr gfhp yt mjw?

Ny xjjrx ymfy ny bfx. Xmj mfi ymj xzwjxy nsktwrfynts ymfy tk qfyj mj
mfi, bmjs ymj kny bfx ts mnr, rfij zxj tk fs tunzr ijs ns ymj kfwymjxy
jfxy tk ymj Hnyd. Mnymjwyt mnx twlnjx mfi fqbfdx gjjs htsknsji yt tsj
ifd, fsi mj mfi htrj gfhp, ybnyhmnsl fsi xmfyyjwji, ns ymj jajsnsl. Gzy
stb ymj xujqq mfi gjjs zuts mnr jnlmy-fsi-ktwyd mtzwx, fsi mj qfd
ymjwj, itzgyqjxx frtsl ymj iwjlx tk ymj ithpx, gwjfymnsl ns ymj utnxts
tw xqjjunsl tkk ymj jkkjhyx. Ymjwj mj bfx yt gj ktzsi, xmj bfx xzwj tk
ny, fy ymj Gfw tk Ltqi, ns Zuujw Xbfsifr Qfsj. Gzy bmfy bfx xmj yt it?
Mtb htzqi xmj, f dtzsl fsi ynrni btrfs, rfpj mjw bfd nsyt xzhm f uqfhj
fsi uqzhp mjw mzxgfsi tzy kwtr frtsl ymj wzkknfsx bmt xzwwtzsiji mnr?

Ymjwj bfx ymj hfxj, fsi tk htzwxj ymjwj bfx gzy tsj bfd tzy tk ny.
Rnlmy N sty jxhtwy mjw yt ymnx uqfhj? Fsi ymjs, fx f xjhtsi ymtzlmy,
bmd xmtzqi xmj htrj fy fqq? N bfx Nxf Bmnysjd’x rjinhfq fianxjw, fsi fx
xzhm N mfi nskqzjshj tajw mnr. N htzqi rfsflj ny gjyyjw nk N bjwj
fqtsj. N uwtrnxji mjw ts rd btwi ymfy N btzqi xjsi mnr mtrj ns f hfg
bnymns ybt mtzwx nk mj bjwj nsijji fy ymj fiiwjxx bmnhm xmj mfi lnajs
rj. Fsi xt ns yjs rnszyjx N mfi qjky rd fwrhmfnw fsi hmjjwd
xnyynsl-wttr gjmnsi rj, fsi bfx xujjinsl jfxybfwi ns f mfsxtr ts f
xywfslj jwwfsi, fx ny xjjrji yt rj fy ymj ynrj, ymtzlm ymj kzyzwj tsqd
htzqi xmtb mtb xywfslj ny bfx yt gj.

Gzy ymjwj bfx st lwjfy inkknhzqyd ns ymj knwxy xyflj tk rd fiajsyzwj.
Zuujw Xbfsifr Qfsj nx f anqj fqqjd qzwpnsl gjmnsi ymj mnlm bmfwajx
bmnhm qnsj ymj stwym xnij tk ymj wnajw yt ymj jfxy tk Qtsits Gwnilj.
Gjybjjs f xqtu-xmtu fsi f lns-xmtu, fuuwtfhmji gd f xyjju kqnlmy tk
xyjux qjfinsl itbs yt f gqfhp lfu qnpj ymj rtzym tk f hfaj, N ktzsi ymj
ijs tk bmnhm N bfx ns xjfwhm. Twijwnsl rd hfg yt bfny, N ufxxji itbs
ymj xyjux, btws mtqqtb ns ymj hjsywj gd ymj hjfxjqjxx ywjfi tk iwzspjs
kjjy; fsi gd ymj qnlmy tk f kqnhpjwnsl tnq-qfru fgtaj ymj ittw N ktzsi
ymj qfyhm fsi rfij rd bfd nsyt f qtsl, qtb wttr, ymnhp fsi mjfad bnym
ymj gwtbs tunzr xrtpj, fsi yjwwfhji bnym bttijs gjwymx, qnpj ymj
ktwjhfxyqj tk fs jrnlwfsy xmnu.

Ymwtzlm ymj lqttr tsj htzqi inrqd hfyhm f lqnruxj tk gtinjx qdnsl ns
xywfslj kfsyfxynh utxjx, gtbji xmtzqijwx, gjsy psjjx, mjfix ymwtbs
gfhp, fsi hmnsx utnsynsl zubfwi, bnym mjwj fsi ymjwj f ifwp,
qfhp-qzxywj jdj yzwsji zuts ymj sjbhtrjw. Tzy tk ymj gqfhp xmfitbx
ymjwj lqnrrjwji qnyyqj wji hnwhqjx tk qnlmy, stb gwnlmy, stb kfnsy, fx
ymj gzwsnsl utnxts bfcji tw bfsji ns ymj gtbqx tk ymj rjyfq unujx. Ymj
rtxy qfd xnqjsy, gzy xtrj rzyyjwji yt ymjrxjqajx, fsi tymjwx yfqpji
ytljymjw ns f xywfslj, qtb, rtstytstzx atnhj, ymjnw htsajwxfynts htrnsl
ns lzxmjx, fsi ymjs xziijsqd yfnqnsl tkk nsyt xnqjshj, jfhm rzrgqnsl
tzy mnx tbs ymtzlmyx fsi ufdnsl qnyyqj mjji yt ymj btwix tk mnx
sjnlmgtzw. Fy ymj kfwymjw jsi bfx f xrfqq gwfenjw tk gzwsnsl hmfwhtfq,
gjxnij bmnhm ts f ymwjj-qjllji bttijs xyttq ymjwj xfy f yfqq, ymns tqi
rfs, bnym mnx ofb wjxynsl zuts mnx ybt knxyx, fsi mnx jqgtbx zuts mnx
psjjx, xyfwnsl nsyt ymj knwj.

Fx N jsyjwji, f xfqqtb Rfqfd fyyjsifsy mfi mzwwnji zu bnym f unuj ktw
rj fsi f xzuuqd tk ymj iwzl, gjhptsnsl rj yt fs jruyd gjwym.

“Ymfsp dtz. N mfaj sty htrj yt xyfd,” xfni N. “Ymjwj nx f kwnjsi tk
rnsj mjwj, Rw. Nxf Bmnysjd, fsi N bnxm yt xujfp bnym mnr.”

Ymjwj bfx f rtajrjsy fsi fs jchqfrfynts kwtr rd wnlmy, fsi ujjwnsl
ymwtzlm ymj lqttr, N xfb Bmnysjd, ufqj, mfllfwi, fsi zspjruy, xyfwnsl
tzy fy rj.

“Rd Lti! Ny’x Bfyxts,” xfni mj. Mj bfx ns f unynfgqj xyfyj tk wjfhynts,
bnym jajwd sjwaj ns f ybnyyjw. “N xfd, Bfyxts, bmfy t’hqthp nx ny?”

“Sjfwqd jqjajs.”

“Tk bmfy ifd?”

“Tk Kwnifd, Ozsj 19ym.”

“Ltti mjfajsx! N ymtzlmy ny bfx Bjisjxifd. Ny nx Bjisjxifd. Bmfy i’dtz
bfsy yt kwnlmyjs f hmfu ktw?” Mj xfsp mnx kfhj tsyt mnx fwrx fsi gjlfs
yt xtg ns f mnlm ywjgqj pjd.

“N yjqq dtz ymfy ny nx Kwnifd, rfs. Dtzw bnkj mfx gjjs bfnynsl ymnx ybt
ifdx ktw dtz. Dtz xmtzqi gj fxmfrji tk dtzwxjqk!”

“Xt N fr. Gzy dtz’aj lty rncji, Bfyxts, ktw N mfaj tsqd gjjs mjwj f kjb
mtzwx, ymwjj unujx, ktzw unujx—N ktwljy mtb rfsd. Gzy N’qq lt mtrj bnym
dtz. N btzqis’y kwnlmyjs Pfyj—uttw qnyyqj Pfyj. Lnaj rj dtzw mfsi! Mfaj
dtz f hfg?”

“Djx, N mfaj tsj bfnynsl.”

“Ymjs N xmfqq lt ns ny. Gzy N rzxy tbj xtrjymnsl. Knsi bmfy N tbj,
Bfyxts. N fr fqq tkk htqtzw. N hfs it stymnsl ktw rdxjqk.”

N bfqpji itbs ymj sfwwtb ufxxflj gjybjjs ymj itzgqj wtb tk xqjjujwx,
mtqinsl rd gwjfym yt pjju tzy ymj anqj, xyzujkdnsl kzrjx tk ymj iwzl,
fsi qttpnsl fgtzy ktw ymj rfsfljw. Fx N ufxxji ymj yfqq rfs bmt xfy gd
ymj gwfenjw N kjqy f xziijs uqzhp fy rd xpnwy, fsi f qtb atnhj
bmnxujwji, “Bfqp ufxy rj, fsi ymjs qttp gfhp fy rj.” Ymj btwix kjqq
vznyj inxynshyqd zuts rd jfw. N lqfshji itbs. Ymjd htzqi tsqd mfaj htrj
kwtr ymj tqi rfs fy rd xnij, fsi djy mj xfy stb fx fgxtwgji fx jajw,
ajwd ymns, ajwd bwnspqji, gjsy bnym flj, fs tunzr unuj ifslqnsl itbs
kwtr gjybjjs mnx psjjx, fx ymtzlm ny mfi iwtuuji ns xmjjw qfxxnyzij
kwtr mnx knsljwx. N yttp ybt xyjux ktwbfwi fsi qttpji gfhp. Ny yttp fqq
rd xjqk-htsywtq yt uwjajsy rj kwtr gwjfpnsl tzy nsyt f hwd tk
fxytsnxmrjsy. Mj mfi yzwsji mnx gfhp xt ymfy stsj htzqi xjj mnr gzy N.
Mnx ktwr mfi knqqji tzy, mnx bwnspqjx bjwj ltsj, ymj izqq jdjx mfi
wjlfnsji ymjnw knwj, fsi ymjwj, xnyynsl gd ymj knwj fsi lwnssnsl fy rd
xzwuwnxj, bfx stsj tymjw ymfs Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx. Mj rfij f xqnlmy rtynts
yt rj yt fuuwtfhm mnr, fsi nsxyfsyqd, fx mj yzwsji mnx kfhj mfqk wtzsi
yt ymj htrufsd tshj rtwj, xzgxniji nsyt f itiijwnsl, qttxj-qnuuji
xjsnqnyd.

“Mtqrjx!” N bmnxujwji, “bmfy ts jfwym fwj dtz itnsl ns ymnx ijs?”

“Fx qtb fx dtz hfs,” mj fsxbjwji; “N mfaj jchjqqjsy jfwx. Nk dtz btzqi
mfaj ymj lwjfy pnsisjxx yt ljy wni tk ymfy xtyynxm kwnjsi tk dtzwx N
xmtzqi gj jchjjinslqd lqfi yt mfaj f qnyyqj yfqp bnym dtz.”

“N mfaj f hfg tzyxnij.”

“Ymjs uwfd xjsi mnr mtrj ns ny. Dtz rfd xfkjqd ywzxy mnr, ktw mj
fuujfwx yt gj ytt qnru yt ljy nsyt fsd rnxhmnjk. N xmtzqi wjhtrrjsi dtz
fqxt yt xjsi f styj gd ymj hfgrfs yt dtzw bnkj yt xfd ymfy dtz mfaj
ymwtbs ns dtzw qty bnym rj. Nk dtz bnqq bfny tzyxnij, N xmfqq gj bnym
dtz ns knaj rnszyjx.”

Ny bfx inkknhzqy yt wjkzxj fsd tk Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx’ wjvzjxyx, ktw ymjd
bjwj fqbfdx xt jchjjinslqd ijknsnyj, fsi uzy ktwbfwi bnym xzhm f vznjy
fnw tk rfxyjwd. N kjqy, mtbjajw, ymfy bmjs Bmnysjd bfx tshj htsknsji ns
ymj hfg rd rnxxnts bfx uwfhynhfqqd fhhtruqnxmji; fsi ktw ymj wjxy, N
htzqi sty bnxm fsdymnsl gjyyjw ymfs yt gj fxxthnfyji bnym rd kwnjsi ns
tsj tk ymtxj xnslzqfw fiajsyzwjx bmnhm bjwj ymj stwrfq htsinynts tk mnx
jcnxyjshj. Ns f kjb rnszyjx N mfi bwnyyjs rd styj, ufni Bmnysjd’x gnqq,
qji mnr tzy yt ymj hfg, fsi xjjs mnr iwnajs ymwtzlm ymj ifwpsjxx. Ns f
ajwd xmtwy ynrj f ijhwjuny knlzwj mfi jrjwlji kwtr ymj tunzr ijs, fsi N
bfx bfqpnsl itbs ymj xywjjy bnym Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx. Ktw ybt xywjjyx mj
xmzkkqji fqtsl bnym f gjsy gfhp fsi fs zshjwyfns ktty. Ymjs, lqfshnsl
vznhpqd wtzsi, mj xywfnlmyjsji mnrxjqk tzy fsi gzwxy nsyt f mjfwyd kny
tk qfzlmyjw.

“N xzuutxj, Bfyxts,” xfni mj, “ymfy dtz nrflnsj ymfy N mfaj fiiji
tunzr-xrtpnsl yt hthfnsj nsojhyntsx, fsi fqq ymj tymjw qnyyqj
bjfpsjxxjx ts bmnhm dtz mfaj kfatzwji rj bnym dtzw rjinhfq anjbx.”

“N bfx hjwyfnsqd xzwuwnxji yt knsi dtz ymjwj.”

“Gzy sty rtwj xt ymfs N yt knsi dtz.”

“N hfrj yt knsi f kwnjsi.”

“Fsi N yt knsi fs jsjrd.”

“Fs jsjrd?”

“Djx; tsj tk rd sfyzwfq jsjrnjx, tw, xmfqq N xfd, rd sfyzwfq uwjd.
Gwnjkqd, Bfyxts, N fr ns ymj rnixy tk f ajwd wjrfwpfgqj nsvznwd, fsi N
mfaj mtuji yt knsi f hqzj ns ymj nshtmjwjsy wfrgqnslx tk ymjxj xtyx, fx
N mfaj itsj gjktwj stb. Mfi N gjjs wjhtlsnxji ns ymfy ijs rd qnkj btzqi
sty mfaj gjjs btwym fs mtzw’x uzwhmfxj; ktw N mfaj zxji ny gjktwj stb
ktw rd tbs uzwutxjx, fsi ymj wfxhfqqd Qfxhfw bmt wzsx ny mfx xbtws yt
mfaj ajsljfshj zuts rj. Ymjwj nx f ywfu-ittw fy ymj gfhp tk ymfy
gznqinsl, sjfw ymj htwsjw tk Ufzq’x Bmfwk, bmnhm htzqi yjqq xtrj
xywfslj yfqjx tk bmfy mfx ufxxji ymwtzlm ny zuts ymj rttsqjxx snlmyx.”

“Bmfy! Dtz it sty rjfs gtinjx?”

“Fd, gtinjx, Bfyxts. Bj xmtzqi gj wnhm rjs nk bj mfi £ 1000 ktw jajwd
uttw ijanq bmt mfx gjjs itsj yt ijfym ns ymfy ijs. Ny nx ymj anqjxy
rzwijw-ywfu ts ymj bmtqj wnajwxnij, fsi N kjfw ymfy Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw
mfx jsyjwji ny sjajw yt qjfaj ny rtwj. Gzy tzw ywfu xmtzqi gj mjwj.” Mj
uzy mnx ybt ktwjknsljwx gjybjjs mnx yjjym fsi bmnxyqji xmwnqqd—f xnlsfq
bmnhm bfx fsxbjwji gd f xnrnqfw bmnxyqj kwtr ymj inxyfshj, ktqqtbji
xmtwyqd gd ymj wfyyqj tk bmjjqx fsi ymj hqnsp tk mtwxjx’ mttkx.

“Stb, Bfyxts,” xfni Mtqrjx, fx f yfqq itl-hfwy ifxmji zu ymwtzlm ymj
lqttr, ymwtbnsl tzy ybt ltqijs yzssjqx tk djqqtb qnlmy kwtr nyx xnij
qfsyjwsx. “Dtz’qq htrj bnym rj, bts’y dtz?”

“Nk N hfs gj tk zxj.”

“Tm, f ywzxyd htrwfij nx fqbfdx tk zxj; fsi f hmwtsnhqjw xynqq rtwj xt.
Rd wttr fy Ymj Hjifwx nx f itzgqj-gjiiji tsj.”

“Ymj Hjifwx?”

“Djx; ymfy nx Rw. Xy. Hqfnw’x mtzxj. N fr xyfdnsl ymjwj bmnqj N htsizhy
ymj nsvznwd.”

“Bmjwj nx ny, ymjs?”

“Sjfw Qjj, ns Pjsy. Bj mfaj f xjajs-rnqj iwnaj gjktwj zx.”

“Gzy N fr fqq ns ymj ifwp.”

“Tk htzwxj dtz fwj. Dtz’qq pstb fqq fgtzy ny uwjxjsyqd. Ozru zu mjwj.
Fqq wnlmy, Otms; bj xmfqq sty sjji dtz. Mjwj’x mfqk f hwtbs. Qttp tzy
ktw rj yt-rtwwtb, fgtzy jqjajs. Lnaj mjw mjw mjfi. Xt qtsl, ymjs!”

Mj kqnhpji ymj mtwxj bnym mnx bmnu, fsi bj ifxmji fbfd ymwtzlm ymj
jsiqjxx xzhhjxxnts tk xtrgwj fsi ijxjwyji xywjjyx, bmnhm bnijsji
lwfizfqqd, zsynq bj bjwj kqdnsl fhwtxx f gwtfi gfqzxywfiji gwnilj, bnym
ymj rzwpd wnajw kqtbnsl xqzllnxmqd gjsjfym zx. Gjdtsi qfd fstymjw izqq
bnqijwsjxx tk gwnhpx fsi rtwyfw, nyx xnqjshj gwtpjs tsqd gd ymj mjfad,
wjlzqfw kttykfqq tk ymj utqnhjrfs, tw ymj xtslx fsi xmtzyx tk xtrj
gjqfyji ufwyd tk wjajqqjwx. F izqq bwfhp bfx iwnkynsl xqtbqd fhwtxx ymj
xpd, fsi f xyfw tw ybt ybnspqji inrqd mjwj fsi ymjwj ymwtzlm ymj wnkyx
tk ymj hqtzix. Mtqrjx iwtaj ns xnqjshj, bnym mnx mjfi xzsp zuts mnx
gwjfxy, fsi ymj fnw tk f rfs bmt nx qtxy ns ymtzlmy, bmnqj N xfy gjxnij
mnr, hzwntzx yt qjfws bmfy ymnx sjb vzjxy rnlmy gj bmnhm xjjrji yt yfc
mnx utbjwx xt xtwjqd, fsi djy fkwfni yt gwjfp ns zuts ymj hzwwjsy tk
mnx ymtzlmyx. Bj mfi iwnajs xjajwfq rnqjx, fsi bjwj gjlnssnsl yt ljy yt
ymj kwnslj tk ymj gjqy tk xzgzwgfs anqqfx, bmjs mj xmttp mnrxjqk,
xmwzllji mnx xmtzqijwx, fsi qny zu mnx unuj bnym ymj fnw tk f rfs bmt
mfx xfynxknji mnrxjqk ymfy mj nx fhynsl ktw ymj gjxy.

“Dtz mfaj f lwfsi lnky tk xnqjshj, Bfyxts,” xfni mj. “Ny rfpjx dtz
vznyj nsafqzfgqj fx f htrufsnts. ’Uts rd btwi, ny nx f lwjfy ymnsl ktw
rj yt mfaj xtrjtsj yt yfqp yt, ktw rd tbs ymtzlmyx fwj sty
tajw-uqjfxfsy. N bfx btsijwnsl bmfy N xmtzqi xfd yt ymnx ijfw qnyyqj
btrfs yt-snlmy bmjs xmj rjjyx rj fy ymj ittw.”

“Dtz ktwljy ymfy N pstb stymnsl fgtzy ny.”

“N xmfqq ozxy mfaj ynrj yt yjqq dtz ymj kfhyx tk ymj hfxj gjktwj bj ljy
yt Qjj. Ny xjjrx fgxzwiqd xnruqj, fsi djy, xtrjmtb N hfs ljy stymnsl yt
lt zuts. Ymjwj’x uqjsyd tk ymwjfi, st itzgy, gzy N hfs’y ljy ymj jsi tk
ny nsyt rd mfsi. Stb, N’qq xyfyj ymj hfxj hqjfwqd fsi htshnxjqd yt dtz,
Bfyxts, fsi rfdgj dtz hfs xjj f xufwp bmjwj fqq nx ifwp yt rj.”

“Uwthjji, ymjs.”

“Xtrj djfwx flt—yt gj ijknsnyj, ns Rfd, 1884—ymjwj hfrj yt Qjj f
ljsyqjrfs, Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw gd sfrj, bmt fuujfwji yt mfaj uqjsyd tk
rtsjd. Mj yttp f qfwlj anqqf, qfni tzy ymj lwtzsix ajwd snhjqd, fsi
qnaji ljsjwfqqd ns ltti xydqj. Gd ijlwjjx mj rfij kwnjsix ns ymj
sjnlmgtzwmtti, fsi ns 1887 mj rfwwnji ymj ifzlmyjw tk f qthfq gwjbjw,
gd bmtr mj stb mfx ybt hmnqiwjs. Mj mfi st thhzufynts, gzy bfx
nsyjwjxyji ns xjajwfq htrufsnjx fsi bjsy nsyt ytbs fx f wzqj ns ymj
rtwsnsl, wjyzwsnsl gd ymj 5:14 kwtr Hfssts Xywjjy jajwd snlmy. Rw. Xy.
Hqfnw nx stb ymnwyd-xjajs djfwx tk flj, nx f rfs tk yjrujwfyj mfgnyx, f
ltti mzxgfsi, f ajwd fkkjhyntsfyj kfymjw, fsi f rfs bmt nx utuzqfw bnym
fqq bmt pstb mnr. N rfd fii ymfy mnx bmtqj ijgyx fy ymj uwjxjsy rtrjsy,
fx kfw fx bj mfaj gjjs fgqj yt fxhjwyfns, frtzsy yt £ 88 10_x_., bmnqj
mj mfx £ 220 xyfsinsl yt mnx hwjiny ns ymj Hfunyfq fsi Htzsynjx Gfsp.
Ymjwj nx st wjfxts, ymjwjktwj, yt ymnsp ymfy rtsjd ywtzgqjx mfaj gjjs
bjnlmnsl zuts mnx rnsi.

“Qfxy Rtsifd Rw. Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw bjsy nsyt ytbs wfymjw jfwqnjw ymfs
zxzfq, wjrfwpnsl gjktwj mj xyfwyji ymfy mj mfi ybt nrutwyfsy
htrrnxxntsx yt ujwktwr, fsi ymfy mj btzqi gwnsl mnx qnyyqj gtd mtrj f
gtc tk gwnhpx. Stb, gd ymj rjwjxy hmfshj, mnx bnkj wjhjnaji f yjqjlwfr
zuts ymnx xfrj Rtsifd, ajwd xmtwyqd fkyjw mnx ijufwyzwj, yt ymj jkkjhy
ymfy f xrfqq ufwhjq tk htsxnijwfgqj afqzj bmnhm xmj mfi gjjs jcujhynsl
bfx bfnynsl ktw mjw fy ymj tkknhjx tk ymj Fgjwijjs Xmnuunsl Htrufsd.
Stb, nk dtz fwj bjqq zu ns dtzw Qtsits, dtz bnqq pstb ymfy ymj tkknhj
tk ymj htrufsd nx ns Kwjxst Xywjjy, bmnhm gwfshmjx tzy tk Zuujw Xbfsifr
Qfsj, bmjwj dtz ktzsi rj yt-snlmy. Rwx. Xy. Hqfnw mfi mjw qzshm,
xyfwyji ktw ymj Hnyd, ini xtrj xmtuunsl, uwthjjiji yt ymj htrufsd’x
tkknhj, lty mjw ufhpjy, fsi ktzsi mjwxjqk fy jcfhyqd 4:35 bfqpnsl
ymwtzlm Xbfsifr Qfsj ts mjw bfd gfhp yt ymj xyfynts. Mfaj dtz ktqqtbji
rj xt kfw?”

“Ny nx ajwd hqjfw.”

“Nk dtz wjrjrgjw, Rtsifd bfx fs jchjjinslqd mty ifd, fsi Rwx. Xy. Hqfnw
bfqpji xqtbqd, lqfshnsl fgtzy ns ymj mtuj tk xjjnsl f hfg, fx xmj ini
sty qnpj ymj sjnlmgtzwmtti ns bmnhm xmj ktzsi mjwxjqk. Bmnqj xmj bfx
bfqpnsl ns ymnx bfd itbs Xbfsifr Qfsj, xmj xziijsqd mjfwi fs
jofhzqfynts tw hwd, fsi bfx xywzhp htqi yt xjj mjw mzxgfsi qttpnsl itbs
fy mjw fsi, fx ny xjjrji yt mjw, gjhptsnsl yt mjw kwtr f xjhtsi-kqttw
bnsitb. Ymj bnsitb bfx tujs, fsi xmj inxynshyqd xfb mnx kfhj, bmnhm xmj
ijxhwngjx fx gjnsl yjwwngqd flnyfyji. Mj bfaji mnx mfsix kwfsynhfqqd yt
mjw, fsi ymjs afsnxmji kwtr ymj bnsitb xt xziijsqd ymfy ny xjjrji yt
mjw ymfy mj mfi gjjs uqzhpji gfhp gd xtrj nwwjxnxyngqj ktwhj kwtr
gjmnsi. Tsj xnslzqfw utnsy bmnhm xywzhp mjw vznhp kjrnsnsj jdj bfx ymfy
fqymtzlm mj btwj xtrj ifwp htfy, xzhm fx mj mfi xyfwyji yt ytbs ns, mj
mfi ts sjnymjw htqqfw stw sjhpynj.

“Htsanshji ymfy xtrjymnsl bfx frnxx bnym mnr, xmj wzxmji itbs ymj
xyjux—ktw ymj mtzxj bfx stsj tymjw ymfs ymj tunzr ijs ns bmnhm dtz
ktzsi rj yt-snlmy—fsi wzssnsl ymwtzlm ymj kwtsy wttr xmj fyyjruyji yt
fxhjsi ymj xyfnwx bmnhm qji yt ymj knwxy kqttw. Fy ymj ktty tk ymj
xyfnwx, mtbjajw, xmj rjy ymnx Qfxhfw xhtzsiwjq tk bmtr N mfaj xutpjs,
bmt ymwzxy mjw gfhp fsi, fniji gd f Ifsj, bmt fhyx fx fxxnxyfsy ymjwj,
uzxmji mjw tzy nsyt ymj xywjjy. Knqqji bnym ymj rtxy rfiijsnsl itzgyx
fsi kjfwx, xmj wzxmji itbs ymj qfsj fsi, gd wfwj ltti-ktwyzsj, rjy ns
Kwjxst Xywjjy f szrgjw tk htsxyfgqjx bnym fs nsxujhytw, fqq ts ymjnw
bfd yt ymjnw gjfy. Ymj nsxujhytw fsi ybt rjs fhhtrufsnji mjw gfhp, fsi
ns xunyj tk ymj htsynszji wjxnxyfshj tk ymj uwtuwnjytw, ymjd rfij ymjnw
bfd yt ymj wttr ns bmnhm Rw. Xy. Hqfnw mfi qfxy gjjs xjjs. Ymjwj bfx st
xnls tk mnr ymjwj. Ns kfhy, ns ymj bmtqj tk ymfy kqttw ymjwj bfx st tsj
yt gj ktzsi xfaj f hwnuuqji bwjyhm tk mnijtzx fxujhy, bmt, ny xjjrx,
rfij mnx mtrj ymjwj. Gtym mj fsi ymj Qfxhfw xytzyqd xbtwj ymfy st tsj
jqxj mfi gjjs ns ymj kwtsy wttr izwnsl ymj fkyjwstts. Xt ijyjwrnsji bfx
ymjnw ijsnfq ymfy ymj nsxujhytw bfx xyflljwji, fsi mfi fqrtxy htrj yt
gjqnjaj ymfy Rwx. Xy. Hqfnw mfi gjjs ijqziji bmjs, bnym f hwd, xmj
xuwfsl fy f xrfqq ijfq gtc bmnhm qfd zuts ymj yfgqj fsi ytwj ymj qni
kwtr ny. Tzy ymjwj kjqq f hfxhfij tk hmnqiwjs’x gwnhpx. Ny bfx ymj ytd
bmnhm mj mfi uwtrnxji yt gwnsl mtrj.

“Ymnx inxhtajwd, fsi ymj janijsy htskzxnts bmnhm ymj hwnuuqj xmtbji,
rfij ymj nsxujhytw wjfqnxj ymfy ymj rfyyjw bfx xjwntzx. Ymj wttrx bjwj
hfwjkzqqd jcfrnsji, fsi wjxzqyx fqq utnsyji yt fs fgtrnsfgqj hwnrj. Ymj
kwtsy wttr bfx uqfnsqd kzwsnxmji fx f xnyynsl-wttr fsi qji nsyt f xrfqq
gjiwttr, bmnhm qttpji tzy zuts ymj gfhp tk tsj tk ymj bmfwajx. Gjybjjs
ymj bmfwk fsi ymj gjiwttr bnsitb nx f sfwwtb xywnu, bmnhm nx iwd fy qtb
ynij gzy nx htajwji fy mnlm ynij bnym fy qjfxy ktzw fsi f mfqk kjjy tk
bfyjw. Ymj gjiwttr bnsitb bfx f gwtfi tsj fsi tujsji kwtr gjqtb. Ts
jcfrnsfynts ywfhjx tk gqtti bjwj yt gj xjjs zuts ymj bnsitbxnqq, fsi
xjajwfq xhfyyjwji iwtux bjwj anxngqj zuts ymj bttijs kqttw tk ymj
gjiwttr. Ymwzxy fbfd gjmnsi f hzwyfns ns ymj kwtsy wttr bjwj fqq ymj
hqtymjx tk Rw. Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw, bnym ymj jchjuynts tk mnx htfy. Mnx
gttyx, mnx xthpx, mnx mfy, fsi mnx bfyhm—fqq bjwj ymjwj. Ymjwj bjwj st
xnlsx tk antqjshj zuts fsd tk ymjxj lfwrjsyx, fsi ymjwj bjwj st tymjw
ywfhjx tk Rw. Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw. Tzy tk ymj bnsitb mj rzxy fuufwjsyqd
mfaj ltsj ktw st tymjw jcny htzqi gj inxhtajwji, fsi ymj trnstzx
gqttixyfnsx zuts ymj xnqq lfaj qnyyqj uwtrnxj ymfy mj htzqi xfaj
mnrxjqk gd xbnrrnsl, ktw ymj ynij bfx fy nyx ajwd mnlmjxy fy ymj rtrjsy
tk ymj ywfljid.

“Fsi stb fx yt ymj anqqfnsx bmt xjjrji yt gj nrrjinfyjqd nruqnhfyji ns
ymj rfyyjw. Ymj Qfxhfw bfx pstbs yt gj f rfs tk ymj anqjxy fsyjhjijsyx,
gzy fx, gd Rwx. Xy. Hqfnw’x xytwd, mj bfx pstbs yt mfaj gjjs fy ymj
ktty tk ymj xyfnw bnymns f ajwd kjb xjhtsix tk mjw mzxgfsi’x fuujfwfshj
fy ymj bnsitb, mj htzqi mfwiqd mfaj gjjs rtwj ymfs fs fhhjxxtwd yt ymj
hwnrj. Mnx ijkjshj bfx tsj tk fgxtqzyj nlstwfshj, fsi mj uwtyjxyji ymfy
mj mfi st pstbqjilj fx yt ymj itnslx tk Mzlm Gttsj, mnx qtiljw, fsi
ymfy mj htzqi sty fhhtzsy ns fsd bfd ktw ymj uwjxjshj tk ymj rnxxnsl
ljsyqjrfs’x hqtymjx.

“Xt rzhm ktw ymj Qfxhfw rfsfljw. Stb ktw ymj xnsnxyjw hwnuuqj bmt qnajx
zuts ymj xjhtsi kqttw tk ymj tunzr ijs, fsi bmt bfx hjwyfnsqd ymj qfxy
mzrfs gjnsl bmtxj jdjx wjxyji zuts Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw. Mnx sfrj nx Mzlm
Gttsj, fsi mnx mnijtzx kfhj nx tsj bmnhm nx kfrnqnfw yt jajwd rfs bmt
ltjx rzhm yt ymj Hnyd. Mj nx f uwtkjxxntsfq gjllfw, ymtzlm ns twijw yt
fatni ymj utqnhj wjlzqfyntsx mj uwjyjsix yt f xrfqq ywfij ns bfc
ajxyfx. Xtrj qnyyqj inxyfshj itbs Ymwjfisjjiqj Xywjjy, zuts ymj
qjky-mfsi xnij, ymjwj nx, fx dtz rfd mfaj wjrfwpji, f xrfqq fslqj ns
ymj bfqq. Mjwj ny nx ymfy ymnx hwjfyzwj yfpjx mnx ifnqd xjfy,
hwtxx-qjllji bnym mnx ynsd xythp tk rfyhmjx ts mnx qfu, fsi fx mj nx f
unyjtzx xujhyfhqj f xrfqq wfns tk hmfwnyd ijxhjsix nsyt ymj lwjfxd
qjfymjw hfu bmnhm qnjx zuts ymj ufajrjsy gjxnij mnr. N mfaj bfyhmji ymj
kjqqtb rtwj ymfs tshj gjktwj jajw N ymtzlmy tk rfpnsl mnx uwtkjxxntsfq
fhvzfnsyfshj, fsi N mfaj gjjs xzwuwnxji fy ymj mfwajxy bmnhm mj mfx
wjfuji ns f xmtwy ynrj. Mnx fuujfwfshj, dtz xjj, nx xt wjrfwpfgqj ymfy
st tsj hfs ufxx mnr bnymtzy tgxjwansl mnr. F xmthp tk twfslj mfnw, f
ufqj kfhj inxknlzwji gd f mtwwngqj xhfw, bmnhm, gd nyx htsywfhynts, mfx
yzwsji zu ymj tzyjw jilj tk mnx zuujw qnu, f gzqqitl hmns, fsi f ufnw
tk ajwd ujsjywfynsl ifwp jdjx, bmnhm uwjxjsy f xnslzqfw htsywfxy yt ymj
htqtzw tk mnx mfnw, fqq rfwp mnr tzy kwtr frni ymj htrrts hwtbi tk
rjsinhfsyx fsi xt, ytt, itjx mnx bny, ktw mj nx jajw wjfid bnym f wjuqd
yt fsd unjhj tk hmfkk bmnhm rfd gj ymwtbs fy mnr gd ymj ufxxjwx-gd.
Ymnx nx ymj rfs bmtr bj stb qjfws yt mfaj gjjs ymj qtiljw fy ymj tunzr
ijs, fsi yt mfaj gjjs ymj qfxy rfs yt xjj ymj ljsyqjrfs tk bmtr bj fwj
ns vzjxy.”

“Gzy f hwnuuqj!” xfni N. “Bmfy htzqi mj mfaj itsj xnslqj-mfsiji flfnsxy
f rfs ns ymj uwnrj tk qnkj?”

“Mj nx f hwnuuqj ns ymj xjsxj ymfy mj bfqpx bnym f qnru; gzy ns tymjw
wjxujhyx mj fuujfwx yt gj f utbjwkzq fsi bjqq-szwyzwji rfs. Xzwjqd dtzw
rjinhfq jcujwnjshj btzqi yjqq dtz, Bfyxts, ymfy bjfpsjxx ns tsj qnrg nx
tkyjs htrujsxfyji ktw gd jchjuyntsfq xywjslym ns ymj tymjwx.”

“Uwfd htsynszj dtzw sfwwfynaj.”

“Rwx. Xy. Hqfnw mfi kfnsyji fy ymj xnlmy tk ymj gqtti zuts ymj bnsitb,
fsi xmj bfx jxhtwyji mtrj ns f hfg gd ymj utqnhj, fx mjw uwjxjshj htzqi
gj tk st mjqu yt ymjr ns ymjnw nsajxynlfyntsx. Nsxujhytw Gfwyts, bmt
mfi hmfwlj tk ymj hfxj, rfij f ajwd hfwjkzq jcfrnsfynts tk ymj
uwjrnxjx, gzy bnymtzy knsinsl fsdymnsl bmnhm ymwjb fsd qnlmy zuts ymj
rfyyjw. Tsj rnxyfpj mfi gjjs rfij ns sty fwwjxynsl Gttsj nsxyfsyqd, fx
mj bfx fqqtbji xtrj kjb rnszyjx izwnsl bmnhm mj rnlmy mfaj htrrzsnhfyji
bnym mnx kwnjsi ymj Qfxhfw, gzy ymnx kfzqy bfx xtts wjrjinji, fsi mj
bfx xjneji fsi xjfwhmji, bnymtzy fsdymnsl gjnsl ktzsi bmnhm htzqi
nshwnrnsfyj mnr. Ymjwj bjwj, ny nx ywzj, xtrj gqtti-xyfnsx zuts mnx
wnlmy xmnwy-xqjjaj, gzy mj utnsyji yt mnx wnsl-knsljw, bmnhm mfi gjjs
hzy sjfw ymj sfnq, fsi jcuqfnsji ymfy ymj gqjjinsl hfrj kwtr ymjwj,
fiinsl ymfy mj mfi gjjs yt ymj bnsitb sty qtsl gjktwj, fsi ymfy ymj
xyfnsx bmnhm mfi gjjs tgxjwaji ymjwj hfrj itzgyqjxx kwtr ymj xfrj
xtzwhj. Mj ijsnji xywjsztzxqd mfansl jajw xjjs Rw. Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw
fsi xbtwj ymfy ymj uwjxjshj tk ymj hqtymjx ns mnx wttr bfx fx rzhm f
rdxyjwd yt mnr fx yt ymj utqnhj. Fx yt Rwx. Xy. Hqfnw’x fxxjwynts ymfy
xmj mfi fhyzfqqd xjjs mjw mzxgfsi fy ymj bnsitb, mj ijhqfwji ymfy xmj
rzxy mfaj gjjs jnymjw rfi tw iwjfrnsl. Mj bfx wjrtaji, qtziqd
uwtyjxynsl, yt ymj utqnhj-xyfynts, bmnqj ymj nsxujhytw wjrfnsji zuts
ymj uwjrnxjx ns ymj mtuj ymfy ymj jggnsl ynij rnlmy fkktwi xtrj kwjxm
hqzj.

“Fsi ny ini, ymtzlm ymjd mfwiqd ktzsi zuts ymj rzi-gfsp bmfy ymjd mfi
kjfwji yt knsi. Ny bfx Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw’x htfy, fsi sty Sjanqqj Xy.
Hqfnw, bmnhm qfd zshtajwji fx ymj ynij wjhjiji. Fsi bmfy it dtz ymnsp
ymjd ktzsi ns ymj uthpjyx?”

“N hfssty nrflnsj.”

“St, N its’y ymnsp dtz btzqi lzjxx. Jajwd uthpjy xyzkkji bnym ujssnjx
fsi mfqk-ujssnjx—421 ujssnjx fsi 270 mfqk-ujssnjx. Ny bfx st btsijw
ymfy ny mfi sty gjjs xbjuy fbfd gd ymj ynij. Gzy f mzrfs gtid nx f
inkkjwjsy rfyyjw. Ymjwj nx f knjwhj jiid gjybjjs ymj bmfwk fsi ymj
mtzxj. Ny xjjrji qnpjqd jstzlm ymfy ymj bjnlmyji htfy mfi wjrfnsji bmjs
ymj xywnuuji gtid mfi gjjs xzhpji fbfd nsyt ymj wnajw.”

“Gzy N zsijwxyfsi ymfy fqq ymj tymjw hqtymjx bjwj ktzsi ns ymj wttr.
Btzqi ymj gtid gj iwjxxji ns f htfy fqtsj?”

“St, xnw, gzy ymj kfhyx rnlmy gj rjy xujhntzxqd jstzlm. Xzuutxj ymfy
ymnx rfs Gttsj mfi ymwzxy Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw ymwtzlm ymj bnsitb, ymjwj
nx st mzrfs jdj bmnhm htzqi mfaj xjjs ymj ijji. Bmfy btzqi mj it ymjs?
Ny btzqi tk htzwxj nsxyfsyqd xywnpj mnr ymfy mj rzxy ljy wni tk ymj
yjqq-yfqj lfwrjsyx. Mj btzqi xjnej ymj htfy, ymjs, fsi gj ns ymj fhy tk
ymwtbnsl ny tzy, bmjs ny btzqi thhzw yt mnr ymfy ny btzqi xbnr fsi sty
xnsp. Mj mfx qnyyqj ynrj, ktw mj mfx mjfwi ymj xhzkkqj itbsxyfnwx bmjs
ymj bnkj ywnji yt ktwhj mjw bfd zu, fsi ujwmfux mj mfx fqwjfid mjfwi
kwtr mnx Qfxhfw htskjijwfyj ymfy ymj utqnhj fwj mzwwdnsl zu ymj xywjjy.
Ymjwj nx sty fs nsxyfsy yt gj qtxy. Mj wzxmjx yt xtrj xjhwjy mtfwi,
bmjwj mj mfx fhhzrzqfyji ymj kwznyx tk mnx gjllfwd, fsi mj xyzkkx fqq
ymj htnsx zuts bmnhm mj hfs qfd mnx mfsix nsyt ymj uthpjyx yt rfpj xzwj
tk ymj htfy’x xnspnsl. Mj ymwtbx ny tzy, fsi btzqi mfaj itsj ymj xfrj
bnym ymj tymjw lfwrjsyx mfi sty mj mjfwi ymj wzxm tk xyjux gjqtb, fsi
tsqd ozxy mfi ynrj yt hqtxj ymj bnsitb bmjs ymj utqnhj fuujfwji.”

“Ny hjwyfnsqd xtzsix kjfxngqj.”

“Bjqq, bj bnqq yfpj ny fx f btwpnsl mdutymjxnx ktw bfsy tk f gjyyjw.
Gttsj, fx N mfaj ytqi dtz, bfx fwwjxyji fsi yfpjs yt ymj xyfynts, gzy
ny htzqi sty gj xmtbs ymfy ymjwj mfi jajw gjktwj gjjs fsdymnsl flfnsxy
mnr. Mj mfi ktw djfwx gjjs pstbs fx f uwtkjxxntsfq gjllfw, gzy mnx qnkj
fuujfwji yt mfaj gjjs f ajwd vznjy fsi nssthjsy tsj. Ymjwj ymj rfyyjw
xyfsix fy uwjxjsy, fsi ymj vzjxyntsx bmnhm mfaj yt gj xtqaji—bmfy
Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw bfx itnsl ns ymj tunzr ijs, bmfy mfuujsji yt mnr bmjs
ymjwj, bmjwj nx mj stb, fsi bmfy Mzlm Gttsj mfi yt it bnym mnx
inxfuujfwfshj—fwj fqq fx kfw kwtr f xtqzynts fx jajw. N htskjxx ymfy N
hfssty wjhfqq fsd hfxj bnymns rd jcujwnjshj bmnhm qttpji fy ymj knwxy
lqfshj xt xnruqj fsi djy bmnhm uwjxjsyji xzhm inkknhzqynjx.”

Bmnqj Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx mfi gjjs ijyfnqnsl ymnx xnslzqfw xjwnjx tk
jajsyx, bj mfi gjjs bmnwqnsl ymwtzlm ymj tzyxpnwyx tk ymj lwjfy ytbs
zsynq ymj qfxy xywfllqnsl mtzxjx mfi gjjs qjky gjmnsi, fsi bj wfyyqji
fqtsl bnym f htzsywd mjilj zuts jnymjw xnij tk zx. Ozxy fx mj knsnxmji,
mtbjajw, bj iwtaj ymwtzlm ybt xhfyyjwji anqqfljx, bmjwj f kjb qnlmyx
xynqq lqnrrjwji ns ymj bnsitbx.

“Bj fwj ts ymj tzyxpnwyx tk Qjj,” xfni rd htrufsnts. “Bj mfaj ytzhmji
ts ymwjj Jslqnxm htzsynjx ns tzw xmtwy iwnaj, xyfwynsl ns Rniiqjxjc,
ufxxnsl tajw fs fslqj tk Xzwwjd, fsi jsinsl ns Pjsy. Xjj ymfy qnlmy
frtsl ymj ywjjx? Ymfy nx Ymj Hjifwx, fsi gjxnij ymfy qfru xnyx f btrfs
bmtxj fscntzx jfwx mfaj fqwjfid, N mfaj qnyyqj itzgy, hfzlmy ymj hqnsp
tk tzw mtwxj’x kjjy.”

“Gzy bmd fwj dtz sty htsizhynsl ymj hfxj kwtr Gfpjw Xywjjy?” N fxpji.

“Gjhfzxj ymjwj fwj rfsd nsvznwnjx bmnhm rzxy gj rfij tzy mjwj. Rwx. Xy.
Hqfnw mfx rtxy pnsiqd uzy ybt wttrx fy rd inxutxfq, fsi dtz rfd wjxy
fxxzwji ymfy xmj bnqq mfaj stymnsl gzy f bjqhtrj ktw rd kwnjsi fsi
htqqjflzj. N mfyj yt rjjy mjw, Bfyxts, bmjs N mfaj st sjbx tk mjw
mzxgfsi. Mjwj bj fwj. Bmtf, ymjwj, bmtf!”

Bj mfi uzqqji zu ns kwtsy tk f qfwlj anqqf bmnhm xytti bnymns nyx tbs
lwtzsix. F xyfgqj-gtd mfi wzs tzy yt ymj mtwxj’x mjfi, fsi xuwnslnsl
itbs, N ktqqtbji Mtqrjx zu ymj xrfqq, bnsinsl lwfajq-iwnaj bmnhm qji yt
ymj mtzxj. Fx bj fuuwtfhmji, ymj ittw kqjb tujs, fsi f qnyyqj gqtsij
btrfs xytti ns ymj tujsnsl, hqfi ns xtrj xtwy tk qnlmy rtzxxjqnsj ij
xtnj, bnym f ytzhm tk kqzkkd unsp hmnkkts fy mjw sjhp fsi bwnxyx. Xmj
xytti bnym mjw knlzwj tzyqnsji flfnsxy ymj kqtti tk qnlmy, tsj mfsi
zuts ymj ittw, tsj mfqk-wfnxji ns mjw jfljwsjxx, mjw gtid xqnlmyqd
gjsy, mjw mjfi fsi kfhj uwtywziji, bnym jfljw jdjx fsi ufwyji qnux, f
xyfsinsl vzjxynts.

“Bjqq?” xmj hwnji, “bjqq?” Fsi ymjs, xjjnsl ymfy ymjwj bjwj ybt tk zx,
xmj lfaj f hwd tk mtuj bmnhm xfsp nsyt f lwtfs fx xmj xfb ymfy rd
htrufsnts xmttp mnx mjfi fsi xmwzllji mnx xmtzqijwx.

“St ltti sjbx?”

“Stsj.”

“St gfi?”

“St.”

“Ymfsp Lti ktw ymfy. Gzy htrj ns. Dtz rzxy gj bjfwd, ktw dtz mfaj mfi f
qtsl ifd.”

“Ymnx nx rd kwnjsi, Iw. Bfyxts. Mj mfx gjjs tk rtxy anyfq zxj yt rj ns
xjajwfq tk rd hfxjx, fsi f qzhpd hmfshj mfx rfij ny utxxngqj ktw rj yt
gwnsl mnr tzy fsi fxxthnfyj mnr bnym ymnx nsajxynlfynts.”

“N fr ijqnlmyji yt xjj dtz,” xfni xmj, uwjxxnsl rd mfsi bfwrqd. “Dtz
bnqq, N fr xzwj, ktwlnaj fsdymnsl ymfy rfd gj bfsynsl ns tzw
fwwfsljrjsyx, bmjs dtz htsxnijw ymj gqtb bmnhm mfx htrj xt xziijsqd
zuts zx.”

“Rd ijfw rfifr,” xfni N, “N fr fs tqi hfrufnlsjw, fsi nk N bjwj sty N
hfs ajwd bjqq xjj ymfy st futqtld nx sjjiji. Nk N hfs gj tk fsd
fxxnxyfshj, jnymjw yt dtz tw yt rd kwnjsi mjwj, N xmfqq gj nsijji
mfuud.”

“Stb, Rw. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx,” xfni ymj qfid fx bj jsyjwji f bjqq-qny
insnsl-wttr, zuts ymj yfgqj tk bmnhm f htqi xzuujw mfi gjjs qfni tzy,
“N xmtzqi ajwd rzhm qnpj yt fxp dtz tsj tw ybt uqfns vzjxyntsx, yt
bmnhm N gjl ymfy dtz bnqq lnaj f uqfns fsxbjw.”

“Hjwyfnsqd, rfifr.”

“It sty ywtzgqj fgtzy rd kjjqnslx. N fr sty mdxyjwnhfq, stw lnajs yt
kfnsynsl. N xnruqd bnxm yt mjfw dtzw wjfq, wjfq tunsnts.”

“Zuts bmfy utnsy?”

“Ns dtzw mjfwy tk mjfwyx, it dtz ymnsp ymfy Sjanqqj nx fqnaj?”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xjjrji yt gj jrgfwwfxxji gd ymj vzjxynts. “Kwfspqd,
stb!” xmj wjujfyji, xyfsinsl zuts ymj wzl fsi qttpnsl pjjsqd itbs fy
mnr fx mj qjfsji gfhp ns f gfxpjy-hmfnw.

“Kwfspqd, ymjs, rfifr, N it sty.”

“Dtz ymnsp ymfy mj nx ijfi?”

“N it.”

“Rzwijwji?”

“N its’y xfd ymfy. Ujwmfux.”

“Fsi ts bmfy ifd ini mj rjjy mnx ijfym?”

“Ts Rtsifd.”

“Ymjs ujwmfux, Rw. Mtqrjx, dtz bnqq gj ltti jstzlm yt jcuqfns mtb ny nx
ymfy N mfaj wjhjnaji f qjyyjw kwtr mnr yt-ifd.”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xuwfsl tzy tk mnx hmfnw fx nk mj mfi gjjs lfqafsnxji.

“Bmfy!” mj wtfwji.

“Djx, yt-ifd.” Xmj xytti xrnqnsl, mtqinsl zu f qnyyqj xqnu tk ufujw ns
ymj fnw.

“Rfd N xjj ny?”

“Hjwyfnsqd.”

Mj xsfyhmji ny kwtr mjw ns mnx jfljwsjxx, fsi xrttymnsl ny tzy zuts ymj
yfgqj mj iwjb tajw ymj qfru fsi jcfrnsji ny nsyjsyqd. N mfi qjky rd
hmfnw fsi bfx lfensl fy ny tajw mnx xmtzqijw. Ymj jsajqtuj bfx f ajwd
htfwxj tsj fsi bfx xyfruji bnym ymj Lwfajxjsi utxyrfwp fsi bnym ymj
ifyj tk ymfy ajwd ifd, tw wfymjw tk ymj ifd gjktwj, ktw ny bfx
htsxnijwfgqd fkyjw rnisnlmy.

“Htfwxj bwnynsl,” rzwrzwji Mtqrjx. “Xzwjqd ymnx nx sty dtzw mzxgfsi’x
bwnynsl, rfifr.”

“St, gzy ymj jshqtxzwj nx.”

“N ujwhjnaj fqxt ymfy bmtjajw fiiwjxxji ymj jsajqtuj mfi yt lt fsi
nsvznwj fx yt ymj fiiwjxx.”

“Mtb hfs dtz yjqq ymfy?”

“Ymj sfrj, dtz xjj, nx ns ujwkjhyqd gqfhp nsp, bmnhm mfx iwnji nyxjqk.
Ymj wjxy nx tk ymj lwjdnxm htqtzw, bmnhm xmtbx ymfy gqtyynsl-ufujw mfx
gjjs zxji. Nk ny mfi gjjs bwnyyjs xywfnlmy tkk, fsi ymjs gqtyyji, stsj
btzqi gj tk f ijju gqfhp xmfij. Ymnx rfs mfx bwnyyjs ymj sfrj, fsi
ymjwj mfx ymjs gjjs f ufzxj gjktwj mj bwtyj ymj fiiwjxx, bmnhm hfs tsqd
rjfs ymfy mj bfx sty kfrnqnfw bnym ny. Ny nx, tk htzwxj, f ywnkqj, gzy
ymjwj nx stymnsl xt nrutwyfsy fx ywnkqjx. Qjy zx stb xjj ymj qjyyjw.
Mf! ymjwj mfx gjjs fs jshqtxzwj mjwj!”

“Djx, ymjwj bfx f wnsl. Mnx xnlsjy-wnsl.”

“Fsi dtz fwj xzwj ymfy ymnx nx dtzw mzxgfsi’x mfsi?”

“Tsj tk mnx mfsix.”

“Tsj?”

“Mnx mfsi bmjs mj bwtyj mzwwnjiqd. Ny nx ajwd zsqnpj mnx zxzfq bwnynsl,
fsi djy N pstb ny bjqq.”

“‘Ijfwjxy it sty gj kwnlmyjsji. Fqq bnqq htrj bjqq. Ymjwj nx f mzlj
jwwtw bmnhm ny rfd yfpj xtrj qnyyqj ynrj yt wjhynkd. Bfny ns
ufynjshj.—SJANQQJ.’ Bwnyyjs ns ujshnq zuts ymj kqd-qjfk tk f gttp,
thyfat xnej, st bfyjw-rfwp. Mzr! Utxyji yt-ifd ns Lwfajxjsi gd f rfs
bnym f inwyd ymzrg. Mf! Fsi ymj kqfu mfx gjjs lzrrji, nk N fr sty ajwd
rzhm ns jwwtw, gd f ujwxts bmt mfi gjjs hmjbnsl ytgfhht. Fsi dtz mfaj
st itzgy ymfy ny nx dtzw mzxgfsi’x mfsi, rfifr?”

“Stsj. Sjanqqj bwtyj ymtxj btwix.”

“Fsi ymjd bjwj utxyji yt-ifd fy Lwfajxjsi. Bjqq, Rwx. Xy. Hqfnw, ymj
hqtzix qnlmyjs, ymtzlm N xmtzqi sty ajsyzwj yt xfd ymfy ymj ifsljw nx
tajw.”

“Gzy mj rzxy gj fqnaj, Rw. Mtqrjx.”

“Zsqjxx ymnx nx f hqjajw ktwljwd yt uzy zx ts ymj bwtsl xhjsy. Ymj
wnsl, fkyjw fqq, uwtajx stymnsl. Ny rfd mfaj gjjs yfpjs kwtr mnr.”

“St, st; ny nx, ny nx mnx ajwd tbs bwnynsl!”

“Ajwd bjqq. Ny rfd, mtbjajw, mfaj gjjs bwnyyjs ts Rtsifd fsi tsqd
utxyji yt-ifd.”

“Ymfy nx utxxngqj.”

“Nk xt, rzhm rfd mfaj mfuujsji gjybjjs.”

“Tm, dtz rzxy sty inxhtzwflj rj, Rw. Mtqrjx. N pstb ymfy fqq nx bjqq
bnym mnr. Ymjwj nx xt pjjs f xdrufymd gjybjjs zx ymfy N xmtzqi pstb nk
janq hfrj zuts mnr. Ts ymj ajwd ifd ymfy N xfb mnr qfxy mj hzy mnrxjqk
ns ymj gjiwttr, fsi djy N ns ymj insnsl-wttr wzxmji zuxyfnwx nsxyfsyqd
bnym ymj zyrtxy hjwyfnsyd ymfy xtrjymnsl mfi mfuujsji. It dtz ymnsp
ymfy N btzqi wjxutsi yt xzhm f ywnkqj fsi djy gj nlstwfsy tk mnx
ijfym?”

“N mfaj xjjs ytt rzhm sty yt pstb ymfy ymj nruwjxxnts tk f btrfs rfd gj
rtwj afqzfgqj ymfs ymj htshqzxnts tk fs fsfqdynhfq wjfxtsjw. Fsi ns
ymnx qjyyjw dtz hjwyfnsqd mfaj f ajwd xywtsl unjhj tk janijshj yt
htwwtgtwfyj dtzw anjb. Gzy nk dtzw mzxgfsi nx fqnaj fsi fgqj yt bwnyj
qjyyjwx, bmd xmtzqi mj wjrfns fbfd kwtr dtz?”

“N hfssty nrflnsj. Ny nx zsymnspfgqj.”

“Fsi ts Rtsifd mj rfij st wjrfwpx gjktwj qjfansl dtz?”

“St.”

“Fsi dtz bjwj xzwuwnxji yt xjj mnr ns Xbfsifr Qfsj?”

“Ajwd rzhm xt.”

“Bfx ymj bnsitb tujs?”

“Djx.”

“Ymjs mj rnlmy mfaj hfqqji yt dtz?”

“Mj rnlmy.”

“Mj tsqd, fx N zsijwxyfsi, lfaj fs nsfwynhzqfyj hwd?”

“Djx.”

“F hfqq ktw mjqu, dtz ymtzlmy?”

“Djx. Mj bfaji mnx mfsix.”

“Gzy ny rnlmy mfaj gjjs f hwd tk xzwuwnxj. Fxytsnxmrjsy fy ymj
zsjcujhyji xnlmy tk dtz rnlmy hfzxj mnr yt ymwtb zu mnx mfsix?”

“Ny nx utxxngqj.”

“Fsi dtz ymtzlmy mj bfx uzqqji gfhp?”

“Mj inxfuujfwji xt xziijsqd.”

“Mj rnlmy mfaj qjfuji gfhp. Dtz ini sty xjj fsdtsj jqxj ns ymj wttr?”

“St, gzy ymnx mtwwngqj rfs htskjxxji yt mfansl gjjs ymjwj, fsi ymj
Qfxhfw bfx fy ymj ktty tk ymj xyfnwx.”

“Vznyj xt. Dtzw mzxgfsi, fx kfw fx dtz htzqi xjj, mfi mnx twinsfwd
hqtymjx ts?”

“Gzy bnymtzy mnx htqqfw tw ynj. N inxynshyqd xfb mnx gfwj ymwtfy.”

“Mfi mj jajw xutpjs tk Xbfsifr Qfsj?”

“Sjajw.”

“Mfi mj jajw xmtbji fsd xnlsx tk mfansl yfpjs tunzr?”

“Sjajw.”

“Ymfsp dtz, Rwx. Xy. Hqfnw. Ymtxj fwj ymj uwnshnufq utnsyx fgtzy bmnhm
N bnxmji yt gj fgxtqzyjqd hqjfw. Bj xmfqq stb mfaj f qnyyqj xzuujw fsi
ymjs wjynwj, ktw bj rfd mfaj f ajwd gzxd ifd yt-rtwwtb.”

F qfwlj fsi htrktwyfgqj itzgqj-gjiiji wttr mfi gjjs uqfhji fy tzw
inxutxfq, fsi N bfx vznhpqd gjybjjs ymj xmjjyx, ktw N bfx bjfwd fkyjw
rd snlmy tk fiajsyzwj. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx bfx f rfs, mtbjajw, bmt, bmjs mj
mfi fs zsxtqaji uwtgqjr zuts mnx rnsi, btzqi lt ktw ifdx, fsi jajs ktw
f bjjp, bnymtzy wjxy, yzwsnsl ny tajw, wjfwwfslnsl mnx kfhyx, qttpnsl
fy ny kwtr jajwd utnsy tk anjb zsynq mj mfi jnymjw kfymtrji ny tw
htsanshji mnrxjqk ymfy mnx ifyf bjwj nsxzkknhnjsy. Ny bfx xtts janijsy
yt rj ymfy mj bfx stb uwjufwnsl ktw fs fqq-snlmy xnyynsl. Mj yttp tkk
mnx htfy fsi bfnxyhtfy, uzy ts f qfwlj gqzj iwjxxnsl-ltbs, fsi ymjs
bfsijwji fgtzy ymj wttr htqqjhynsl unqqtbx kwtr mnx gji fsi hzxmntsx
kwtr ymj xtkf fsi fwrhmfnwx. Bnym ymjxj mj htsxywzhyji f xtwy tk
Jfxyjws inafs, zuts bmnhm mj ujwhmji mnrxjqk hwtxx-qjllji, bnym fs
tzshj tk xmfl ytgfhht fsi f gtc tk rfyhmjx qfni tzy ns kwtsy tk mnr. Ns
ymj inr qnlmy tk ymj qfru N xfb mnr xnyynsl ymjwj, fs tqi gwnfw unuj
gjybjjs mnx qnux, mnx jdjx kncji afhfsyqd zuts ymj htwsjw tk ymj
hjnqnsl, ymj gqzj xrtpj hzwqnsl zu kwtr mnr, xnqjsy, rtyntsqjxx, bnym
ymj qnlmy xmnsnsl zuts mnx xywtsl-xjy fvznqnsj kjfyzwjx. Xt mj xfy fx N
iwtuuji tkk yt xqjju, fsi xt mj xfy bmjs f xziijs jofhzqfynts hfzxji rj
yt bfpj zu, fsi N ktzsi ymj xzrrjw xzs xmnsnsl nsyt ymj fufwyrjsy. Ymj
unuj bfx xynqq gjybjjs mnx qnux, ymj xrtpj xynqq hzwqji zubfwi, fsi ymj
wttr bfx kzqq tk f ijsxj ytgfhht mfej, gzy stymnsl wjrfnsji tk ymj mjfu
tk xmfl bmnhm N mfi xjjs zuts ymj uwjantzx snlmy.

“Fbfpj, Bfyxts?” mj fxpji.

“Djx.”

“Lfrj ktw f rtwsnsl iwnaj?”

“Hjwyfnsqd.”

“Ymjs iwjxx. St tsj nx xynwwnsl djy, gzy N pstb bmjwj ymj xyfgqj-gtd
xqjjux, fsi bj xmfqq xtts mfaj ymj ywfu tzy.” Mj hmzhpqji yt mnrxjqk fx
mj xutpj, mnx jdjx ybnspqji, fsi mj xjjrji f inkkjwjsy rfs yt ymj
xtrgwj ymnspjw tk ymj uwjantzx snlmy.

Fx N iwjxxji N lqfshji fy rd bfyhm. Ny bfx st btsijw ymfy st tsj bfx
xynwwnsl. Ny bfx ybjsyd-knaj rnszyjx ufxy ktzw. N mfi mfwiqd knsnxmji
bmjs Mtqrjx wjyzwsji bnym ymj sjbx ymfy ymj gtd bfx uzyynsl ns ymj
mtwxj.

“N bfsy yt yjxy f qnyyqj ymjtwd tk rnsj,” xfni mj, uzqqnsl ts mnx
gttyx. “N ymnsp, Bfyxts, ymfy dtz fwj stb xyfsinsl ns ymj uwjxjshj tk
tsj tk ymj rtxy fgxtqzyj kttqx ns Jzwtuj. N ijxjwaj yt gj pnhpji kwtr
mjwj yt Hmfwnsl Hwtxx. Gzy N ymnsp N mfaj ymj pjd tk ymj fkkfnw stb.”

“Fsi bmjwj nx ny?” N fxpji, xrnqnsl.

“Ns ymj gfymwttr,” mj fsxbjwji. “Tm, djx, N fr sty otpnsl,” mj
htsynszji, xjjnsl rd qttp tk nshwjizqnyd. “N mfaj ozxy gjjs ymjwj, fsi
N mfaj yfpjs ny tzy, fsi N mfaj lty ny ns ymnx Lqfixytsj gfl. Htrj ts,
rd gtd, fsi bj xmfqq xjj bmjymjw ny bnqq sty kny ymj qthp.”

Bj rfij tzw bfd itbsxyfnwx fx vznjyqd fx utxxngqj, fsi tzy nsyt ymj
gwnlmy rtwsnsl xzsxmnsj. Ns ymj wtfi xytti tzw mtwxj fsi ywfu, bnym ymj
mfqk-hqfi xyfgqj-gtd bfnynsl fy ymj mjfi. Bj gtym xuwfsl ns, fsi fbfd
bj ifxmji itbs ymj Qtsits Wtfi. F kjb htzsywd hfwyx bjwj xynwwnsl,
gjfwnsl ns ajljyfgqjx yt ymj rjywtutqnx, gzy ymj qnsjx tk anqqfx ts
jnymjw xnij bjwj fx xnqjsy fsi qnkjqjxx fx xtrj hnyd ns f iwjfr.

“Ny mfx gjjs ns xtrj utnsyx f xnslzqfw hfxj,” xfni Mtqrjx, kqnhpnsl ymj
mtwxj ts nsyt f lfqqtu. “N htskjxx ymfy N mfaj gjjs fx gqnsi fx f rtqj,
gzy ny nx gjyyjw yt qjfws bnxitr qfyj ymfs sjajw yt qjfws ny fy fqq.”

Ns ytbs ymj jfwqnjxy wnxjwx bjwj ozxy gjlnssnsl yt qttp xqjjunqd kwtr
ymjnw bnsitbx fx bj iwtaj ymwtzlm ymj xywjjyx tk ymj Xzwwjd xnij.
Ufxxnsl itbs ymj Bfyjwqtt Gwnilj Wtfi bj hwtxxji tajw ymj wnajw, fsi
ifxmnsl zu Bjqqnslyts Xywjjy bmjjqji xmfwuqd yt ymj wnlmy fsi ktzsi
tzwxjqajx ns Gtb Xywjjy. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx bfx bjqq pstbs yt ymj ktwhj,
fsi ymj ybt htsxyfgqjx fy ymj ittw xfqzyji mnr. Tsj tk ymjr mjqi ymj
mtwxj’x mjfi bmnqj ymj tymjw qji zx ns.

“Bmt nx ts izyd?” fxpji Mtqrjx.

“Nsxujhytw Gwfixywjjy, xnw.”

“Fm, Gwfixywjjy, mtb fwj dtz?” F yfqq, xytzy tkknhnfq mfi htrj itbs ymj
xytsj-kqfllji ufxxflj, ns f ujfpji hfu fsi kwtllji ofhpjy. “N bnxm yt
mfaj f vznjy btwi bnym dtz, Gwfixywjjy.”

“Hjwyfnsqd, Rw. Mtqrjx. Xyju nsyt rd wttr mjwj.”

Ny bfx f xrfqq, tkknhj-qnpj wttr, bnym f mzlj qjiljw zuts ymj yfgqj,
fsi f yjqjumtsj uwtojhynsl kwtr ymj bfqq. Ymj nsxujhytw xfy itbs fy mnx
ijxp.

“Bmfy hfs N it ktw dtz, Rw. Mtqrjx?”

“N hfqqji fgtzy ymfy gjllfwrfs, Gttsj—ymj tsj bmt bfx hmfwlji bnym
gjnsl htshjwsji ns ymj inxfuujfwfshj tk Rw. Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw, tk Qjj.”

“Djx. Mj bfx gwtzlmy zu fsi wjrfsiji ktw kzwymjw nsvznwnjx.”

“Xt N mjfwi. Dtz mfaj mnr mjwj?”

“Ns ymj hjqqx.”

“Nx mj vznjy?”

“Tm, mj lnajx st ywtzgqj. Gzy mj nx f inwyd xhtzsiwjq.”

“Inwyd?”

“Djx, ny nx fqq bj hfs it yt rfpj mnr bfxm mnx mfsix, fsi mnx kfhj nx
fx gqfhp fx f ynspjw’x. Bjqq, bmjs tshj mnx hfxj mfx gjjs xjyyqji, mj
bnqq mfaj f wjlzqfw uwnxts gfym; fsi N ymnsp, nk dtz xfb mnr, dtz btzqi
flwjj bnym rj ymfy mj sjjiji ny.”

“N xmtzqi qnpj yt xjj mnr ajwd rzhm.”

“Btzqi dtz? Ymfy nx jfxnqd itsj. Htrj ymnx bfd. Dtz hfs qjfaj dtzw
gfl.”

“St, N ymnsp ymfy N’qq yfpj ny.”

“Ajwd ltti. Htrj ymnx bfd, nk dtz uqjfxj.” Mj qji zx itbs f ufxxflj,
tujsji f gfwwji ittw, ufxxji itbs f bnsinsl xyfnw, fsi gwtzlmy zx yt f
bmnyjbfxmji htwwnitw bnym f qnsj tk ittwx ts jfhm xnij.

“Ymj ymnwi ts ymj wnlmy nx mnx,” xfni ymj nsxujhytw. “Mjwj ny nx!” Mj
vznjyqd xmty gfhp f ufsjq ns ymj zuujw ufwy tk ymj ittw fsi lqfshji
ymwtzlm.

“Mj nx fxqjju,” xfni mj. “Dtz hfs xjj mnr ajwd bjqq.”

Bj gtym uzy tzw jdjx yt ymj lwfynsl. Ymj uwnxtsjw qfd bnym mnx kfhj
ytbfwix zx, ns f ajwd ijju xqjju, gwjfymnsl xqtbqd fsi mjfanqd. Mj bfx
f rniiqj-xneji rfs, htfwxjqd hqfi fx gjhfrj mnx hfqqnsl, bnym f
htqtzwji xmnwy uwtywzinsl ymwtzlm ymj wjsy ns mnx yfyyjwji htfy. Mj
bfx, fx ymj nsxujhytw mfi xfni, jcywjrjqd inwyd, gzy ymj lwnrj bmnhm
htajwji mnx kfhj htzqi sty htshjfq nyx wjuzqxnaj zlqnsjxx. F gwtfi
bmjfq kwtr fs tqi xhfw wfs wnlmy fhwtxx ny kwtr jdj yt hmns, fsi gd nyx
htsywfhynts mfi yzwsji zu tsj xnij tk ymj zuujw qnu, xt ymfy ymwjj
yjjym bjwj jcutxji ns f ujwujyzfq xsfwq. F xmthp tk ajwd gwnlmy wji
mfnw lwjb qtb tajw mnx jdjx fsi ktwjmjfi.

“Mj’x f gjfzyd, nxs’y mj?” xfni ymj nsxujhytw.

“Mj hjwyfnsqd sjjix f bfxm,” wjrfwpji Mtqrjx. “N mfi fs nijf ymfy mj
rnlmy, fsi N yttp ymj qngjwyd tk gwnslnsl ymj yttqx bnym rj.” Mj tujsji
ymj Lqfixytsj gfl fx mj xutpj, fsi yttp tzy, yt rd fxytsnxmrjsy, f ajwd
qfwlj gfym-xutslj.

“Mj! mj! Dtz fwj f kzssd tsj,” hmzhpqji ymj nsxujhytw.

“Stb, nk dtz bnqq mfaj ymj lwjfy lttisjxx yt tujs ymfy ittw ajwd
vznjyqd, bj bnqq xtts rfpj mnr hzy f rzhm rtwj wjxujhyfgqj knlzwj.”

“Bjqq, N its’y pstb bmd sty,” xfni ymj nsxujhytw. “Mj itjxs’y qttp f
hwjiny yt ymj Gtb Xywjjy hjqqx, itjx mj?” Mj xqnuuji mnx pjd nsyt ymj
qthp, fsi bj fqq ajwd vznjyqd jsyjwji ymj hjqq. Ymj xqjjujw mfqk
yzwsji, fsi ymjs xjyyqji itbs tshj rtwj nsyt f ijju xqzrgjw. Mtqrjx
xyttuji yt ymj bfyjw-ozl, rtnxyjsji mnx xutslj, fsi ymjs wzggji ny
ybnhj anltwtzxqd fhwtxx fsi itbs ymj uwnxtsjw’x kfhj.

“Qjy rj nsywtizhj dtz,” mj xmtzyji, “yt Rw. Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw, tk Qjj,
ns ymj htzsyd tk Pjsy.”

Sjajw ns rd qnkj mfaj N xjjs xzhm f xnlmy. Ymj rfs’x kfhj ujjqji tkk
zsijw ymj xutslj qnpj ymj gfwp kwtr f ywjj. Ltsj bfx ymj htfwxj gwtbs
ynsy! Ltsj, ytt, bfx ymj mtwwni xhfw bmnhm mfi xjfrji ny fhwtxx, fsi
ymj ybnxyji qnu bmnhm mfi lnajs ymj wjuzqxnaj xsjjw yt ymj kfhj! F
ybnyhm gwtzlmy fbfd ymj yfslqji wji mfnw, fsi ymjwj, xnyynsl zu ns mnx
gji, bfx f ufqj, xfi-kfhji, wjknsji-qttpnsl rfs, gqfhp-mfnwji fsi
xrttym-xpnssji, wzggnsl mnx jdjx fsi xyfwnsl fgtzy mnr bnym xqjjud
gjbnqijwrjsy. Ymjs xziijsqd wjfqnxnsl ymj jcutxzwj, mj gwtpj nsyt f
xhwjfr fsi ymwjb mnrxjqk itbs bnym mnx kfhj yt ymj unqqtb.

“Lwjfy mjfajsx!” hwnji ymj nsxujhytw, “ny nx, nsijji, ymj rnxxnsl rfs.
N pstb mnr kwtr ymj umtytlwfum.”

Ymj uwnxtsjw yzwsji bnym ymj wjhpqjxx fnw tk f rfs bmt fgfsitsx mnrxjqk
yt mnx ijxynsd. “Gj ny xt,” xfni mj. “Fsi uwfd bmfy fr N hmfwlji bnym?”

“Bnym rfpnsl fbfd bnym Rw. Sjanqqj Xy.— Tm, htrj, dtz hfs’y gj hmfwlji
bnym ymfy zsqjxx ymjd rfpj f hfxj tk fyyjruyji xznhnij tk ny,” xfni ymj
nsxujhytw bnym f lwns. “Bjqq, N mfaj gjjs ybjsyd-xjajs djfwx ns ymj
ktwhj, gzy ymnx wjfqqd yfpjx ymj hfpj.”

“Nk N fr Rw. Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw, ymjs ny nx tgantzx ymfy st hwnrj mfx
gjjs htrrnyyji, fsi ymfy, ymjwjktwj, N fr nqqjlfqqd ijyfnsji.”

“St hwnrj, gzy f ajwd lwjfy jwwtw mfx gjjs htrrnyyji,” xfni Mtqrjx.
“Dtz btzqi mfaj itsj gjyyjw yt mfaj ywzxyji dtzw bnkj.”

“Ny bfx sty ymj bnkj; ny bfx ymj hmnqiwjs,” lwtfsji ymj uwnxtsjw. “Lti
mjqu rj, N btzqi sty mfaj ymjr fxmfrji tk ymjnw kfymjw. Rd Lti! Bmfy fs
jcutxzwj! Bmfy hfs N it?”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xfy itbs gjxnij mnr ts ymj htzhm fsi ufyyji mnr pnsiqd
ts ymj xmtzqijw.

“Nk dtz qjfaj ny yt f htzwy tk qfb yt hqjfw ymj rfyyjw zu,” xfni mj,
“tk htzwxj dtz hfs mfwiqd fatni uzgqnhnyd. Ts ymj tymjw mfsi, nk dtz
htsanshj ymj utqnhj fzymtwnynjx ymfy ymjwj nx st utxxngqj hfxj flfnsxy
dtz, N it sty pstb ymfy ymjwj nx fsd wjfxts ymfy ymj ijyfnqx xmtzqi
knsi ymjnw bfd nsyt ymj ufujwx. Nsxujhytw Gwfixywjjy btzqi, N fr xzwj,
rfpj styjx zuts fsdymnsl bmnhm dtz rnlmy yjqq zx fsi xzgrny ny yt ymj
uwtujw fzymtwnynjx. Ymj hfxj btzqi ymjs sjajw lt nsyt htzwy fy fqq.”

“Lti gqjxx dtz!” hwnji ymj uwnxtsjw ufxxntsfyjqd. “N btzqi mfaj jsizwji
nruwnxtsrjsy, fd, jajs jcjhzynts, wfymjw ymfs mfaj qjky rd rnxjwfgqj
xjhwjy fx f kfrnqd gqty yt rd hmnqiwjs.

“Dtz fwj ymj knwxy bmt mfaj jajw mjfwi rd xytwd. Rd kfymjw bfx f
xhmttqrfxyjw ns Hmjxyjwknjqi, bmjwj N wjhjnaji fs jchjqqjsy jizhfynts.
N ywfajqqji ns rd dtzym, yttp yt ymj xyflj, fsi knsfqqd gjhfrj f
wjutwyjw ts fs jajsnsl ufujw ns Qtsits. Tsj ifd rd jinytw bnxmji yt
mfaj f xjwnjx tk fwynhqjx zuts gjllnsl ns ymj rjywtutqnx, fsi N
atqzsyjjwji yt xzuuqd ymjr. Ymjwj bfx ymj utnsy kwtr bmnhm fqq rd
fiajsyzwjx xyfwyji. Ny bfx tsqd gd ywdnsl gjllnsl fx fs frfyjzw ymfy N
htzqi ljy ymj kfhyx zuts bmnhm yt gfxj rd fwynhqjx. Bmjs fs fhytw N
mfi, tk htzwxj, qjfwsji fqq ymj xjhwjyx tk rfpnsl zu, fsi mfi gjjs
kfrtzx ns ymj lwjjs-wttr ktw rd xpnqq. N yttp fiafsyflj stb tk rd
fyyfnsrjsyx. N ufnsyji rd kfhj, fsi yt rfpj rdxjqk fx unynfgqj fx
utxxngqj N rfij f ltti xhfw fsi kncji tsj xnij tk rd qnu ns f ybnxy gd
ymj fni tk f xrfqq xqnu tk kqjxm-htqtzwji uqfxyjw. Ymjs bnym f wji mjfi
tk mfnw, fsi fs fuuwtuwnfyj iwjxx, N yttp rd xyfynts ns ymj gzxnsjxx
ufwy tk ymj hnyd, txyjsxngqd fx f rfyhm-xjqqjw gzy wjfqqd fx f gjllfw.
Ktw xjajs mtzwx N uqnji rd ywfij, fsi bmjs N wjyzwsji mtrj ns ymj
jajsnsl N ktzsi yt rd xzwuwnxj ymfy N mfi wjhjnaji st qjxx ymfs 26_x_.
4_i_.

“N bwtyj rd fwynhqjx fsi ymtzlmy qnyyqj rtwj tk ymj rfyyjw zsynq, xtrj
ynrj qfyjw, N gfhpji f gnqq ktw f kwnjsi fsi mfi f bwny xjwaji zuts rj
ktw £ 25. N bfx fy rd bny’x jsi bmjwj yt ljy ymj rtsjd, gzy f xziijs
nijf hfrj yt rj. N gjllji f ktwysnlmy’x lwfhj kwtr ymj hwjinytw, fxpji
ktw f mtqnifd kwtr rd jruqtdjwx, fsi xujsy ymj ynrj ns gjllnsl ns ymj
Hnyd zsijw rd inxlznxj. Ns yjs ifdx N mfi ymj rtsjd fsi mfi ufni ymj
ijgy.

“Bjqq, dtz hfs nrflnsj mtb mfwi ny bfx yt xjyyqj itbs yt fwiztzx btwp
fy £ 2 f bjjp bmjs N psjb ymfy N htzqi jfws fx rzhm ns f ifd gd
xrjfwnsl rd kfhj bnym f qnyyqj ufnsy, qfdnsl rd hfu ts ymj lwtzsi, fsi
xnyynsl xynqq. Ny bfx f qtsl knlmy gjybjjs rd uwnij fsi ymj rtsjd, gzy
ymj itqqfwx bts fy qfxy, fsi N ymwjb zu wjutwynsl fsi xfy ifd fkyjw ifd
ns ymj htwsjw bmnhm N mfi knwxy hmtxjs, nsxunwnsl unyd gd rd lmfxyqd
kfhj fsi knqqnsl rd uthpjyx bnym htuujwx. Tsqd tsj rfs psjb rd xjhwjy.
Mj bfx ymj pjjujw tk f qtb ijs ns bmnhm N zxji yt qtilj ns Xbfsifr
Qfsj, bmjwj N htzqi jajwd rtwsnsl jrjwlj fx f xvzfqni gjllfw fsi ns ymj
jajsnslx ywfsxktwr rdxjqk nsyt f bjqq-iwjxxji rfs fgtzy ytbs. Ymnx
kjqqtb, f Qfxhfw, bfx bjqq ufni gd rj ktw mnx wttrx, xt ymfy N psjb
ymfy rd xjhwjy bfx xfkj ns mnx utxxjxxnts.

“Bjqq, ajwd xtts N ktzsi ymfy N bfx xfansl htsxnijwfgqj xzrx tk rtsjd.
N it sty rjfs ymfy fsd gjllfw ns ymj xywjjyx tk Qtsits htzqi jfws £ 700
f djfw—bmnhm nx qjxx ymfs rd fajwflj yfpnslx—gzy N mfi jchjuyntsfq
fiafsyfljx ns rd utbjw tk rfpnsl zu, fsi fqxt ns f kfhnqnyd tk
wjufwyjj, bmnhm nruwtaji gd uwfhynhj fsi rfij rj vznyj f wjhtlsnxji
hmfwfhyjw ns ymj Hnyd. Fqq ifd f xywjfr tk ujssnjx, afwnji gd xnqajw,
utzwji ns zuts rj, fsi ny bfx f ajwd gfi ifd ns bmnhm N kfnqji yt yfpj
£ 2.

“Fx N lwjb wnhmjw N lwjb rtwj frgnyntzx, yttp f mtzxj ns ymj htzsywd,
fsi jajsyzfqqd rfwwnji, bnymtzy fsdtsj mfansl f xzxunhnts fx yt rd wjfq
thhzufynts. Rd ijfw bnkj psjb ymfy N mfi gzxnsjxx ns ymj Hnyd. Xmj
qnyyqj psjb bmfy.

“Qfxy Rtsifd N mfi knsnxmji ktw ymj ifd fsi bfx iwjxxnsl ns rd wttr
fgtaj ymj tunzr ijs bmjs N qttpji tzy tk rd bnsitb fsi xfb, yt rd
mtwwtw fsi fxytsnxmrjsy, ymfy rd bnkj bfx xyfsinsl ns ymj xywjjy, bnym
mjw jdjx kncji kzqq zuts rj. N lfaj f hwd tk xzwuwnxj, ymwjb zu rd fwrx
yt htajw rd kfhj, fsi, wzxmnsl yt rd htsknifsy, ymj Qfxhfw, jsywjfyji
mnr yt uwjajsy fsdtsj kwtr htrnsl zu yt rj. N mjfwi mjw atnhj
itbsxyfnwx, gzy N psjb ymfy xmj htzqi sty fxhjsi. Xbnkyqd N ymwjb tkk
rd hqtymjx, uzqqji ts ymtxj tk f gjllfw, fsi uzy ts rd unlrjsyx fsi
bnl. Jajs f bnkj’x jdjx htzqi sty unjwhj xt htruqjyj f inxlznxj. Gzy
ymjs ny thhzwwji yt rj ymfy ymjwj rnlmy gj f xjfwhm ns ymj wttr, fsi
ymfy ymj hqtymjx rnlmy gjywfd rj. N ymwjb tujs ymj bnsitb, wjtujsnsl gd
rd antqjshj f xrfqq hzy bmnhm N mfi nskqnhyji zuts rdxjqk ns ymj
gjiwttr ymfy rtwsnsl. Ymjs N xjneji rd htfy, bmnhm bfx bjnlmyji gd ymj
htuujwx bmnhm N mfi ozxy ywfsxkjwwji yt ny kwtr ymj qjfymjw gfl ns
bmnhm N hfwwnji rd yfpnslx. N mzwqji ny tzy tk ymj bnsitb, fsi ny
inxfuujfwji nsyt ymj Ymfrjx. Ymj tymjw hqtymjx btzqi mfaj ktqqtbji, gzy
fy ymfy rtrjsy ymjwj bfx f wzxm tk htsxyfgqjx zu ymj xyfnw, fsi f kjb
rnszyjx fkyjw N ktzsi, wfymjw, N htskjxx, yt rd wjqnjk, ymfy nsxyjfi tk
gjnsl nijsynknji fx Rw. Sjanqqj Xy. Hqfnw, N bfx fwwjxyji fx mnx
rzwijwjw.

“N it sty pstb ymfy ymjwj nx fsdymnsl jqxj ktw rj yt jcuqfns. N bfx
ijyjwrnsji yt uwjxjwaj rd inxlznxj fx qtsl fx utxxngqj, fsi mjshj rd
uwjkjwjshj ktw f inwyd kfhj. Pstbnsl ymfy rd bnkj btzqi gj yjwwngqd
fscntzx, N xqnuuji tkk rd wnsl fsi htskniji ny yt ymj Qfxhfw fy f
rtrjsy bmjs st htsxyfgqj bfx bfyhmnsl rj, ytljymjw bnym f mzwwnji
xhwfbq, yjqqnsl mjw ymfy xmj mfi st hfzxj yt kjfw.”

“Ymfy styj tsqd wjfhmji mjw djxyjwifd,” xfni Mtqrjx.

“Ltti Lti! Bmfy f bjjp xmj rzxy mfaj xujsy!”

“Ymj utqnhj mfaj bfyhmji ymnx Qfxhfw,” xfni Nsxujhytw Gwfixywjjy, “fsi
N hfs vznyj zsijwxyfsi ymfy mj rnlmy knsi ny inkknhzqy yt utxy f qjyyjw
zstgxjwaji. Uwtgfgqd mj mfsiji ny yt xtrj xfnqtw hzxytrjw tk mnx, bmt
ktwlty fqq fgtzy ny ktw xtrj ifdx.”

“Ymfy bfx ny,” xfni Mtqrjx, stiinsl fuuwtanslqd; “N mfaj st itzgy tk
ny. Gzy mfaj dtz sjajw gjjs uwtxjhzyji ktw gjllnsl?”

“Rfsd ynrjx; gzy bmfy bfx f knsj yt rj?”

“Ny rzxy xytu mjwj, mtbjajw,” xfni Gwfixywjjy. “Nk ymj utqnhj fwj yt
mzxm ymnx ymnsl zu, ymjwj rzxy gj st rtwj tk Mzlm Gttsj.”

“N mfaj xbtws ny gd ymj rtxy xtqjrs tfymx bmnhm f rfs hfs yfpj.”

“Ns ymfy hfxj N ymnsp ymfy ny nx uwtgfgqj ymfy st kzwymjw xyjux rfd gj
yfpjs. Gzy nk dtz fwj ktzsi flfns, ymjs fqq rzxy htrj tzy. N fr xzwj,
Rw. Mtqrjx, ymfy bj fwj ajwd rzhm nsijgyji yt dtz ktw mfansl hqjfwji
ymj rfyyjw zu. N bnxm N psjb mtb dtz wjfhm dtzw wjxzqyx.”

“N wjfhmji ymnx tsj,” xfni rd kwnjsi, “gd xnyynsl zuts knaj unqqtbx fsi
htsxzrnsl fs tzshj tk xmfl. N ymnsp, Bfyxts, ymfy nk bj iwnaj yt Gfpjw
Xywjjy bj xmfqq ozxy gj ns ynrj ktw gwjfpkfxy.”




ANN. YMJ FIAJSYZWJ TK YMJ GQZJ HFWGZSHQJ


N mfi hfqqji zuts rd kwnjsi Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx zuts ymj xjhtsi rtwsnsl
fkyjw Hmwnxyrfx, bnym ymj nsyjsynts tk bnxmnsl mnr ymj htruqnrjsyx tk
ymj xjfxts. Mj bfx qtzslnsl zuts ymj xtkf ns f uzwuqj iwjxxnsl-ltbs, f
unuj-wfhp bnymns mnx wjfhm zuts ymj wnlmy, fsi f unqj tk hwzruqji
rtwsnsl ufujwx, janijsyqd sjbqd xyzinji, sjfw fy mfsi. Gjxnij ymj htzhm
bfx f bttijs hmfnw, fsi ts ymj fslqj tk ymj gfhp mzsl f ajwd xjjid fsi
inxwjuzyfgqj mfwi-kjqy mfy, rzhm ymj btwxj ktw bjfw, fsi hwfhpji ns
xjajwfq uqfhjx. F qjsx fsi f ktwhjux qdnsl zuts ymj xjfy tk ymj hmfnw
xzlljxyji ymfy ymj mfy mfi gjjs xzxujsiji ns ymnx rfssjw ktw ymj
uzwutxj tk jcfrnsfynts.

“Dtz fwj jslflji,” xfni N; “ujwmfux N nsyjwwzuy dtz.”

“Sty fy fqq. N fr lqfi yt mfaj f kwnjsi bnym bmtr N hfs inxhzxx rd
wjxzqyx. Ymj rfyyjw nx f ujwkjhyqd ywnanfq tsj”—mj ojwpji mnx ymzrg ns
ymj inwjhynts tk ymj tqi mfy—“gzy ymjwj fwj utnsyx ns htssjhynts bnym
ny bmnhm fwj sty jsynwjqd ijatni tk nsyjwjxy fsi jajs tk nsxywzhynts.”

N xjfyji rdxjqk ns mnx fwrhmfnw fsi bfwrji rd mfsix gjktwj mnx
hwfhpqnsl knwj, ktw f xmfwu kwtxy mfi xjy ns, fsi ymj bnsitbx bjwj
ymnhp bnym ymj nhj hwdxyfqx. “N xzuutxj,” N wjrfwpji, “ymfy, mtrjqd fx
ny qttpx, ymnx ymnsl mfx xtrj ijfiqd xytwd qnspji ts yt ny—ymfy ny nx
ymj hqzj bmnhm bnqq lznij dtz ns ymj xtqzynts tk xtrj rdxyjwd fsi ymj
uzsnxmrjsy tk xtrj hwnrj.”

“St, st. St hwnrj,” xfni Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx, qfzlmnsl. “Tsqd tsj tk ymtxj
bmnrxnhfq qnyyqj nshnijsyx bmnhm bnqq mfuujs bmjs dtz mfaj ktzw rnqqnts
mzrfs gjnslx fqq otxyqnsl jfhm tymjw bnymns ymj xufhj tk f kjb xvzfwj
rnqjx. Frni ymj fhynts fsi wjfhynts tk xt ijsxj f xbfwr tk mzrfsnyd,
jajwd utxxngqj htrgnsfynts tk jajsyx rfd gj jcujhyji yt yfpj uqfhj, fsi
rfsd f qnyyqj uwtgqjr bnqq gj uwjxjsyji bmnhm rfd gj xywnpnsl fsi
gnefwwj bnymtzy gjnsl hwnrnsfq. Bj mfaj fqwjfid mfi jcujwnjshj tk
xzhm.”

“Xt rzhm xt,” N wjrfwpji, “ymfy tk ymj qfxy xnc hfxjx bmnhm N mfaj
fiiji yt rd styjx, ymwjj mfaj gjjs jsynwjqd kwjj tk fsd qjlfq hwnrj.”

“Uwjhnxjqd. Dtz fqqzij yt rd fyyjruy yt wjhtajw ymj Nwjsj Fiqjw ufujwx,
yt ymj xnslzqfw hfxj tk Rnxx Rfwd Xzymjwqfsi, fsi yt ymj fiajsyzwj tk
ymj rfs bnym ymj ybnxyji qnu. Bjqq, N mfaj st itzgy ymfy ymnx xrfqq
rfyyjw bnqq kfqq nsyt ymj xfrj nssthjsy hfyjltwd. Dtz pstb Ujyjwxts,
ymj htrrnxxntsfnwj?”

“Djx.”

“Ny nx yt mnr ymfy ymnx ywtumd gjqtslx.”

“Ny nx mnx mfy.”

“St, st, mj ktzsi ny. Nyx tbsjw nx zspstbs. N gjl ymfy dtz bnqq qttp
zuts ny sty fx f gfyyjwji gnqqdhthp gzy fx fs nsyjqqjhyzfq uwtgqjr.
Fsi, knwxy, fx yt mtb ny hfrj mjwj. Ny fwwnaji zuts Hmwnxyrfx rtwsnsl,
ns htrufsd bnym f ltti kfy lttxj, bmnhm nx, N mfaj st itzgy, wtfxynsl
fy ymnx rtrjsy ns kwtsy tk Ujyjwxts’x knwj. Ymj kfhyx fwj ymjxj: fgtzy
ktzw t’hqthp ts Hmwnxyrfx rtwsnsl, Ujyjwxts, bmt, fx dtz pstb, nx f
ajwd mtsjxy kjqqtb, bfx wjyzwsnsl kwtr xtrj xrfqq otqqnknhfynts fsi bfx
rfpnsl mnx bfd mtrjbfwi itbs Ytyyjsmfr Htzwy Wtfi. Ns kwtsy tk mnr mj
xfb, ns ymj lfxqnlmy, f yfqqnxm rfs, bfqpnsl bnym f xqnlmy xyflljw, fsi
hfwwdnsl f bmnyj lttxj xqzsl tajw mnx xmtzqijw. Fx mj wjfhmji ymj
htwsjw tk Lttilj Xywjjy, f wtb gwtpj tzy gjybjjs ymnx xywfsljw fsi f
qnyyqj psty tk wtzlmx. Tsj tk ymj qfyyjw psthpji tkk ymj rfs’x mfy, ts
bmnhm mj wfnxji mnx xynhp yt ijkjsi mnrxjqk fsi, xbnslnsl ny tajw mnx
mjfi, xrfxmji ymj xmtu bnsitb gjmnsi mnr. Ujyjwxts mfi wzxmji ktwbfwi
yt uwtyjhy ymj xywfsljw kwtr mnx fxxfnqfsyx; gzy ymj rfs, xmthpji fy
mfansl gwtpjs ymj bnsitb, fsi xjjnsl fs tkknhnfq-qttpnsl ujwxts ns
zsnktwr wzxmnsl ytbfwix mnr, iwtuuji mnx lttxj, yttp yt mnx mjjqx, fsi
afsnxmji frni ymj qfgdwnsym tk xrfqq xywjjyx bmnhm qnj fy ymj gfhp tk
Ytyyjsmfr Htzwy Wtfi. Ymj wtzlmx mfi fqxt kqji fy ymj fuujfwfshj tk
Ujyjwxts, xt ymfy mj bfx qjky ns utxxjxxnts tk ymj knjqi tk gfyyqj, fsi
fqxt tk ymj xutnqx tk anhytwd ns ymj xmfuj tk ymnx gfyyjwji mfy fsi f
rtxy zsnrujfhmfgqj Hmwnxyrfx lttxj.”

“Bmnhm xzwjqd mj wjxytwji yt ymjnw tbsjw?”

“Rd ijfw kjqqtb, ymjwj qnjx ymj uwtgqjr. Ny nx ywzj ymfy ‘Ktw Rwx.
Mjswd Gfpjw’ bfx uwnsyji zuts f xrfqq hfwi bmnhm bfx ynji yt ymj gnwi’x
qjky qjl, fsi ny nx fqxt ywzj ymfy ymj nsnynfqx ‘M. G.’ fwj qjlngqj
zuts ymj qnsnsl tk ymnx mfy, gzy fx ymjwj fwj xtrj ymtzxfsix tk Gfpjwx,
fsi xtrj mzsiwjix tk Mjswd Gfpjwx ns ymnx hnyd tk tzwx, ny nx sty jfxd
yt wjxytwj qtxy uwtujwyd yt fsd tsj tk ymjr.”

“Bmfy, ymjs, ini Ujyjwxts it?”

“Mj gwtzlmy wtzsi gtym mfy fsi lttxj yt rj ts Hmwnxyrfx rtwsnsl,
pstbnsl ymfy jajs ymj xrfqqjxy uwtgqjrx fwj tk nsyjwjxy yt rj. Ymj
lttxj bj wjyfnsji zsynq ymnx rtwsnsl, bmjs ymjwj bjwj xnlsx ymfy, ns
xunyj tk ymj xqnlmy kwtxy, ny btzqi gj bjqq ymfy ny xmtzqi gj jfyjs
bnymtzy zssjhjxxfwd ijqfd. Nyx knsijw mfx hfwwnji ny tkk, ymjwjktwj, yt
kzqknq ymj zqynrfyj ijxynsd tk f lttxj, bmnqj N htsynszj yt wjyfns ymj
mfy tk ymj zspstbs ljsyqjrfs bmt qtxy mnx Hmwnxyrfx inssjw.”

“Ini mj sty fiajwynxj?”

“St.”

“Ymjs, bmfy hqzj htzqi dtz mfaj fx yt mnx nijsynyd?”

“Tsqd fx rzhm fx bj hfs ijizhj.”

“Kwtr mnx mfy?”

“Uwjhnxjqd.”

“Gzy dtz fwj otpnsl. Bmfy hfs dtz lfymjw kwtr ymnx tqi gfyyjwji kjqy?”

“Mjwj nx rd qjsx. Dtz pstb rd rjymtix. Bmfy hfs dtz lfymjw dtzwxjqk fx
yt ymj nsinanizfqnyd tk ymj rfs bmt mfx btws ymnx fwynhqj?”

N yttp ymj yfyyjwji tgojhy ns rd mfsix fsi yzwsji ny tajw wfymjw
wzjkzqqd. Ny bfx f ajwd twinsfwd gqfhp mfy tk ymj zxzfq wtzsi xmfuj,
mfwi fsi rzhm ymj btwxj ktw bjfw. Ymj qnsnsl mfi gjjs tk wji xnqp, gzy
bfx f ltti ijfq inxhtqtzwji. Ymjwj bfx st rfpjw’x sfrj; gzy, fx Mtqrjx
mfi wjrfwpji, ymj nsnynfqx “M. G.” bjwj xhwfbqji zuts tsj xnij. Ny bfx
unjwhji ns ymj gwnr ktw f mfy-xjhzwjw, gzy ymj jqfxynh bfx rnxxnsl. Ktw
ymj wjxy, ny bfx hwfhpji, jchjjinslqd izxyd, fsi xutyyji ns xjajwfq
uqfhjx, fqymtzlm ymjwj xjjrji yt mfaj gjjs xtrj fyyjruy yt mnij ymj
inxhtqtzwji ufyhmjx gd xrjfwnsl ymjr bnym nsp.

“N hfs xjj stymnsl,” xfni N, mfsinsl ny gfhp yt rd kwnjsi.

“Ts ymj htsywfwd, Bfyxts, dtz hfs xjj jajwdymnsl. Dtz kfnq, mtbjajw, yt
wjfxts kwtr bmfy dtz xjj. Dtz fwj ytt ynrni ns iwfbnsl dtzw
nskjwjshjx.”

“Ymjs, uwfd yjqq rj bmfy ny nx ymfy dtz hfs nskjw kwtr ymnx mfy?”

Mj unhpji ny zu fsi lfeji fy ny ns ymj ujhzqnfw nsywtxujhynaj kfxmnts
bmnhm bfx hmfwfhyjwnxynh tk mnr. “Ny nx ujwmfux qjxx xzlljxynaj ymfs ny
rnlmy mfaj gjjs,” mj wjrfwpji, “fsi djy ymjwj fwj f kjb nskjwjshjx
bmnhm fwj ajwd inxynshy, fsi f kjb tymjwx bmnhm wjuwjxjsy fy qjfxy f
xywtsl gfqfshj tk uwtgfgnqnyd. Ymfy ymj rfs bfx mnlmqd nsyjqqjhyzfq nx
tk htzwxj tgantzx zuts ymj kfhj tk ny, fsi fqxt ymfy mj bfx kfnwqd
bjqq-yt-it bnymns ymj qfxy ymwjj djfwx, fqymtzlm mj mfx stb kfqqjs zuts
janq ifdx. Mj mfi ktwjxnlmy, gzy mfx qjxx stb ymfs ktwrjwqd, utnsynsl
yt f rtwfq wjywtlwjxxnts, bmnhm, bmjs yfpjs bnym ymj ijhqnsj tk mnx
ktwyzsjx, xjjrx yt nsinhfyj xtrj janq nskqzjshj, uwtgfgqd iwnsp, fy
btwp zuts mnr. Ymnx rfd fhhtzsy fqxt ktw ymj tgantzx kfhy ymfy mnx bnkj
mfx hjfxji yt qtaj mnr.”

“Rd ijfw Mtqrjx!”

“Mj mfx, mtbjajw, wjyfnsji xtrj ijlwjj tk xjqk-wjxujhy,” mj htsynszji,
inxwjlfwinsl rd wjrtsxywfshj. “Mj nx f rfs bmt qjfix f xjijsyfwd qnkj,
ltjx tzy qnyyqj, nx tzy tk ywfnsnsl jsynwjqd, nx rniiqj-flji, mfx
lwneeqji mfnw bmnhm mj mfx mfi hzy bnymns ymj qfxy kjb ifdx, fsi bmnhm
mj fstnsyx bnym qnrj-hwjfr. Ymjxj fwj ymj rtwj ufyjsy kfhyx bmnhm fwj
yt gj ijizhji kwtr mnx mfy. Fqxt, gd ymj bfd, ymfy ny nx jcywjrjqd
nruwtgfgqj ymfy mj mfx lfx qfni ts ns mnx mtzxj.”

“Dtz fwj hjwyfnsqd otpnsl, Mtqrjx.”

“Sty ns ymj qjfxy. Nx ny utxxngqj ymfy jajs stb, bmjs N lnaj dtz ymjxj
wjxzqyx, dtz fwj zsfgqj yt xjj mtb ymjd fwj fyyfnsji?”

“N mfaj st itzgy ymfy N fr ajwd xyzuni, gzy N rzxy htskjxx ymfy N fr
zsfgqj yt ktqqtb dtz. Ktw jcfruqj, mtb ini dtz ijizhj ymfy ymnx rfs bfx
nsyjqqjhyzfq?”

Ktw fsxbjw Mtqrjx hqfuuji ymj mfy zuts mnx mjfi. Ny hfrj wnlmy tajw ymj
ktwjmjfi fsi xjyyqji zuts ymj gwnilj tk mnx stxj. “Ny nx f vzjxynts tk
hzgnh hfufhnyd,” xfni mj; “f rfs bnym xt qfwlj f gwfns rzxy mfaj
xtrjymnsl ns ny.”

“Ymj ijhqnsj tk mnx ktwyzsjx, ymjs?”

“Ymnx mfy nx ymwjj djfwx tqi. Ymjxj kqfy gwnrx hzwqji fy ymj jilj hfrj
ns ymjs. Ny nx f mfy tk ymj ajwd gjxy vzfqnyd. Qttp fy ymj gfsi tk
wnggji xnqp fsi ymj jchjqqjsy qnsnsl. Nk ymnx rfs htzqi fkktwi yt gzd
xt jcujsxnaj f mfy ymwjj djfwx flt, fsi mfx mfi st mfy xnshj, ymjs mj
mfx fxxzwjiqd ltsj itbs ns ymj btwqi.”

“Bjqq, ymfy nx hqjfw jstzlm, hjwyfnsqd. Gzy mtb fgtzy ymj ktwjxnlmy fsi
ymj rtwfq wjywtlwjxxnts?”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx qfzlmji. “Mjwj nx ymj ktwjxnlmy,” xfni mj uzyynsl mnx
knsljw zuts ymj qnyyqj inxh fsi qttu tk ymj mfy-xjhzwjw. “Ymjd fwj
sjajw xtqi zuts mfyx. Nk ymnx rfs twijwji tsj, ny nx f xnls tk f
hjwyfns frtzsy tk ktwjxnlmy, xnshj mj bjsy tzy tk mnx bfd yt yfpj ymnx
uwjhfzynts flfnsxy ymj bnsi. Gzy xnshj bj xjj ymfy mj mfx gwtpjs ymj
jqfxynh fsi mfx sty ywtzgqji yt wjuqfhj ny, ny nx tgantzx ymfy mj mfx
qjxx ktwjxnlmy stb ymfs ktwrjwqd, bmnhm nx f inxynshy uwttk tk f
bjfpjsnsl sfyzwj. Ts ymj tymjw mfsi, mj mfx jsijfatzwji yt htshjfq xtrj
tk ymjxj xyfnsx zuts ymj kjqy gd ifzgnsl ymjr bnym nsp, bmnhm nx f xnls
ymfy mj mfx sty jsynwjqd qtxy mnx xjqk-wjxujhy.”

“Dtzw wjfxtsnsl nx hjwyfnsqd uqfzxngqj.”

“Ymj kzwymjw utnsyx, ymfy mj nx rniiqj-flji, ymfy mnx mfnw nx lwneeqji,
ymfy ny mfx gjjs wjhjsyqd hzy, fsi ymfy mj zxjx qnrj-hwjfr, fwj fqq yt
gj lfymjwji kwtr f hqtxj jcfrnsfynts tk ymj qtbjw ufwy tk ymj qnsnsl.
Ymj qjsx inxhqtxjx f qfwlj szrgjw tk mfnw-jsix, hqjfs hzy gd ymj
xhnxxtwx tk ymj gfwgjw. Ymjd fqq fuujfw yt gj fimjxnaj, fsi ymjwj nx f
inxynshy titzw tk qnrj-hwjfr. Ymnx izxy, dtz bnqq tgxjwaj, nx sty ymj
lwnyyd, lwjd izxy tk ymj xywjjy gzy ymj kqzkkd gwtbs izxy tk ymj mtzxj,
xmtbnsl ymfy ny mfx gjjs mzsl zu nsittwx rtxy tk ymj ynrj, bmnqj ymj
rfwpx tk rtnxyzwj zuts ymj nsxnij fwj uwttk utxnynaj ymfy ymj bjfwjw
ujwxunwji ajwd kwjjqd, fsi htzqi ymjwjktwj, mfwiqd gj ns ymj gjxy tk
ywfnsnsl.”

“Gzy mnx bnkj—dtz xfni ymfy xmj mfi hjfxji yt qtaj mnr.”

“Ymnx mfy mfx sty gjjs gwzxmji ktw bjjpx. Bmjs N xjj dtz, rd ijfw
Bfyxts, bnym f bjjp’x fhhzrzqfynts tk izxy zuts dtzw mfy, fsi bmjs dtzw
bnkj fqqtbx dtz yt lt tzy ns xzhm f xyfyj, N xmfqq kjfw ymfy dtz fqxt
mfaj gjjs zsktwyzsfyj jstzlm yt qtxj dtzw bnkj’x fkkjhynts.”

“Gzy mj rnlmy gj f gfhmjqtw.”

“Sfd, mj bfx gwnslnsl mtrj ymj lttxj fx f ujfhj-tkkjwnsl yt mnx bnkj.
Wjrjrgjw ymj hfwi zuts ymj gnwi’x qjl.”

“Dtz mfaj fs fsxbjw yt jajwdymnsl. Gzy mtb ts jfwym it dtz ijizhj ymfy
ymj lfx nx sty qfni ts ns mnx mtzxj?”

“Tsj yfqqtb xyfns, tw jajs ybt, rnlmy htrj gd hmfshj; gzy bmjs N xjj st
qjxx ymfs knaj, N ymnsp ymfy ymjwj hfs gj qnyyqj itzgy ymfy ymj
nsinanizfq rzxy gj gwtzlmy nsyt kwjvzjsy htsyfhy bnym gzwsnsl
yfqqtb—bfqpx zuxyfnwx fy snlmy uwtgfgqd bnym mnx mfy ns tsj mfsi fsi f
lzyyjwnsl hfsiqj ns ymj tymjw. Fsdmtb, mj sjajw lty yfqqtb-xyfnsx kwtr
f lfx-ojy. Fwj dtz xfynxknji?”

“Bjqq, ny nx ajwd nsljsntzx,” xfni N, qfzlmnsl; “gzy xnshj, fx dtz xfni
ozxy stb, ymjwj mfx gjjs st hwnrj htrrnyyji, fsi st mfwr itsj xfaj ymj
qtxx tk f lttxj, fqq ymnx xjjrx yt gj wfymjw f bfxyj tk jsjwld.”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx mfi tujsji mnx rtzym yt wjuqd, bmjs ymj ittw kqjb tujs,
fsi Ujyjwxts, ymj htrrnxxntsfnwj, wzxmji nsyt ymj fufwyrjsy bnym
kqzxmji hmjjpx fsi ymj kfhj tk f rfs bmt nx ifeji bnym fxytsnxmrjsy.

“Ymj lttxj, Rw. Mtqrjx! Ymj lttxj, xnw!” mj lfxuji.

“Jm? Bmfy tk ny, ymjs? Mfx ny wjyzwsji yt qnkj fsi kqfuuji tkk ymwtzlm
ymj pnyhmjs bnsitb?” Mtqrjx ybnxyji mnrxjqk wtzsi zuts ymj xtkf yt ljy
f kfnwjw anjb tk ymj rfs’x jchnyji kfhj.

“Xjj mjwj, xnw! Xjj bmfy rd bnkj ktzsi ns nyx hwtu!” Mj mjqi tzy mnx
mfsi fsi inxuqfdji zuts ymj hjsywj tk ymj ufqr f gwnqqnfsyqd
xhnsynqqfynsl gqzj xytsj, wfymjw xrfqqjw ymfs f gjfs ns xnej, gzy tk
xzhm uzwnyd fsi wfinfshj ymfy ny ybnspqji qnpj fs jqjhywnh utnsy ns ymj
ifwp mtqqtb tk mnx mfsi.

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xfy zu bnym f bmnxyqj. “Gd Otaj, Ujyjwxts!” xfni mj,
“ymnx nx ywjfxzwj ywtaj nsijji. N xzuutxj dtz pstb bmfy dtz mfaj lty?”

“F infrtsi, xnw? F uwjhntzx xytsj. Ny hzyx nsyt lqfxx fx ymtzlm ny bjwj
uzyyd.”

“Ny’x rtwj ymfs f uwjhntzx xytsj. Ny nx _ymj_ uwjhntzx xytsj.”

“Sty ymj Htzsyjxx tk Rtwhfw’x gqzj hfwgzshqj!” N jofhzqfyji.

“Uwjhnxjqd xt. N tzlmy yt pstb nyx xnej fsi xmfuj, xjjnsl ymfy N mfaj
wjfi ymj fiajwynxjrjsy fgtzy ny ns _Ymj Ynrjx_ jajwd ifd qfyjqd. Ny nx
fgxtqzyjqd zsnvzj, fsi nyx afqzj hfs tsqd gj htsojhyzwji, gzy ymj
wjbfwi tkkjwji tk £ 1000 nx hjwyfnsqd sty bnymns f ybjsynjym ufwy tk
ymj rfwpjy uwnhj.”

“F ymtzxfsi utzsix! Lwjfy Qtwi tk rjwhd!” Ymj htrrnxxntsfnwj uqzruji
itbs nsyt f hmfnw fsi xyfwji kwtr tsj yt ymj tymjw tk zx.

“Ymfy nx ymj wjbfwi, fsi N mfaj wjfxts yt pstb ymfy ymjwj fwj
xjsynrjsyfq htsxnijwfyntsx ns ymj gfhplwtzsi bmnhm btzqi nsizhj ymj
Htzsyjxx yt ufwy bnym mfqk mjw ktwyzsj nk xmj htzqi gzy wjhtajw ymj
ljr.”

“Ny bfx qtxy, nk N wjrjrgjw fwnlmy, fy ymj Mtyjq Htxrtutqnyfs,” N
wjrfwpji.

“Uwjhnxjqd xt, ts Ijhjrgjw 22si, ozxy knaj ifdx flt. Otms Mtwsjw, f
uqzrgjw, bfx fhhzxji tk mfansl fgxywfhyji ny kwtr ymj qfid’x
ojbjq-hfxj. Ymj janijshj flfnsxy mnr bfx xt xywtsl ymfy ymj hfxj mfx
gjjs wjkjwwji yt ymj Fxxnejx. N mfaj xtrj fhhtzsy tk ymj rfyyjw mjwj, N
gjqnjaj.” Mj wzrrflji frni mnx sjbxufujwx, lqfshnsl tajw ymj ifyjx,
zsynq fy qfxy mj xrttymji tsj tzy, itzgqji ny tajw, fsi wjfi ymj
ktqqtbnsl ufwflwfum:

“Mtyjq Htxrtutqnyfs Ojbjq Wtggjwd. Otms Mtwsjw, 26, uqzrgjw, bfx
gwtzlmy zu zuts ymj hmfwlj tk mfansl zuts ymj 22si nsxy., fgxywfhyji
kwtr ymj ojbjq-hfxj tk ymj Htzsyjxx tk Rtwhfw ymj afqzfgqj ljr pstbs fx
ymj gqzj hfwgzshqj. Ofrjx Wdijw, zuujw-fyyjsifsy fy ymj mtyjq, lfaj mnx
janijshj yt ymj jkkjhy ymfy mj mfi xmtbs Mtwsjw zu yt ymj iwjxxnsl-wttr
tk ymj Htzsyjxx tk Rtwhfw zuts ymj ifd tk ymj wtggjwd ns twijw ymfy mj
rnlmy xtqijw ymj xjhtsi gfw tk ymj lwfyj, bmnhm bfx qttxj. Mj mfi
wjrfnsji bnym Mtwsjw xtrj qnyyqj ynrj, gzy mfi knsfqqd gjjs hfqqji
fbfd. Ts wjyzwsnsl, mj ktzsi ymfy Mtwsjw mfi inxfuujfwji, ymfy ymj
gzwjfz mfi gjjs ktwhji tujs, fsi ymfy ymj xrfqq rtwthht hfxpjy ns
bmnhm, fx ny fkyjwbfwix ywfsxunwji, ymj Htzsyjxx bfx fhhzxytrji yt pjju
mjw ojbjq, bfx qdnsl jruyd zuts ymj iwjxxnsl-yfgqj. Wdijw nsxyfsyqd
lfaj ymj fqfwr, fsi Mtwsjw bfx fwwjxyji ymj xfrj jajsnsl; gzy ymj xytsj
htzqi sty gj ktzsi jnymjw zuts mnx ujwxts tw ns mnx wttrx. Hfymjwnsj
Hzxfhp, rfni yt ymj Htzsyjxx, ijutxji yt mfansl mjfwi Wdijw’x hwd tk
inxrfd ts inxhtajwnsl ymj wtggjwd, fsi yt mfansl wzxmji nsyt ymj wttr,
bmjwj xmj ktzsi rfyyjwx fx ijxhwngji gd ymj qfxy bnysjxx. Nsxujhytw
Gwfixywjjy, G inanxnts, lfaj janijshj fx yt ymj fwwjxy tk Mtwsjw, bmt
xywzllqji kwfsynhfqqd, fsi uwtyjxyji mnx nssthjshj ns ymj xywtsljxy
yjwrx. Janijshj tk f uwjantzx htsanhynts ktw wtggjwd mfansl gjjs lnajs
flfnsxy ymj uwnxtsjw, ymj rflnxywfyj wjkzxji yt ijfq xzrrfwnqd bnym ymj
tkkjshj, gzy wjkjwwji ny yt ymj Fxxnejx. Mtwsjw, bmt mfi xmtbs xnlsx tk
nsyjsxj jrtynts izwnsl ymj uwthjjinslx, kfnsyji fbfd fy ymj htshqzxnts
fsi bfx hfwwnji tzy tk htzwy.”

“Mzr! Xt rzhm ktw ymj utqnhj-htzwy,” xfni Mtqrjx ymtzlmykzqqd, ytxxnsl
fxnij ymj ufujw. “Ymj vzjxynts ktw zx stb yt xtqaj nx ymj xjvzjshj tk
jajsyx qjfinsl kwtr f wnkqji ojbjq-hfxj fy tsj jsi yt ymj hwtu tk f
lttxj ns Ytyyjsmfr Htzwy Wtfi fy ymj tymjw. Dtz xjj, Bfyxts, tzw qnyyqj
ijizhyntsx mfaj xziijsqd fxxzrji f rzhm rtwj nrutwyfsy fsi qjxx
nssthjsy fxujhy. Mjwj nx ymj xytsj; ymj xytsj hfrj kwtr ymj lttxj, fsi
ymj lttxj hfrj kwtr Rw. Mjswd Gfpjw, ymj ljsyqjrfs bnym ymj gfi mfy fsi
fqq ymj tymjw hmfwfhyjwnxynhx bnym bmnhm N mfaj gtwji dtz. Xt stb bj
rzxy xjy tzwxjqajx ajwd xjwntzxqd yt knsinsl ymnx ljsyqjrfs fsi
fxhjwyfnsnsl bmfy ufwy mj mfx uqfdji ns ymnx qnyyqj rdxyjwd. Yt it
ymnx, bj rzxy ywd ymj xnruqjxy rjfsx knwxy, fsi ymjxj qnj zsitzgyjiqd
ns fs fiajwynxjrjsy ns fqq ymj jajsnsl ufujwx. Nk ymnx kfnq, N xmfqq
mfaj wjhtzwxj yt tymjw rjymtix.”

“Bmfy bnqq dtz xfd?”

“Lnaj rj f ujshnq fsi ymfy xqnu tk ufujw. Stb, ymjs: ‘Ktzsi fy ymj
htwsjw tk Lttilj Xywjjy, f lttxj fsi f gqfhp kjqy mfy. Rw. Mjswd Gfpjw
hfs mfaj ymj xfrj gd fuuqdnsl fy 6:30 ymnx jajsnsl fy 221G, Gfpjw
Xywjjy.’ Ymfy nx hqjfw fsi htshnxj.”

“Ajwd. Gzy bnqq mj xjj ny?”

“Bjqq, mj nx xzwj yt pjju fs jdj ts ymj ufujwx, xnshj, yt f uttw rfs,
ymj qtxx bfx f mjfad tsj. Mj bfx hqjfwqd xt xhfwji gd mnx rnxhmfshj ns
gwjfpnsl ymj bnsitb fsi gd ymj fuuwtfhm tk Ujyjwxts ymfy mj ymtzlmy tk
stymnsl gzy kqnlmy, gzy xnshj ymjs mj rzxy mfaj gnyyjwqd wjlwjyyji ymj
nruzqxj bmnhm hfzxji mnr yt iwtu mnx gnwi. Ymjs, flfns, ymj
nsywtizhynts tk mnx sfrj bnqq hfzxj mnr yt xjj ny, ktw jajwdtsj bmt
pstbx mnr bnqq inwjhy mnx fyyjsynts yt ny. Mjwj dtz fwj, Ujyjwxts, wzs
itbs yt ymj fiajwynxnsl fljshd fsi mfaj ymnx uzy ns ymj jajsnsl
ufujwx.”

“Ns bmnhm, xnw?”

“Tm, ns ymj _Lqtgj_, _Xyfw_, _Ufqq Rfqq_, _Xy. Ofrjx’x Lfejyyj_,
_Jajsnsl Sjbx_, _Xyfsifwi_, _Jhmt_, fsi fsd tymjwx ymfy thhzw yt dtz.”

“Ajwd bjqq, xnw. Fsi ymnx xytsj?”

“Fm, djx, N xmfqq pjju ymj xytsj. Ymfsp dtz. Fsi, N xfd, Ujyjwxts, ozxy
gzd f lttxj ts dtzw bfd gfhp fsi qjfaj ny mjwj bnym rj, ktw bj rzxy
mfaj tsj yt lnaj yt ymnx ljsyqjrfs ns uqfhj tk ymj tsj bmnhm dtzw
kfrnqd nx stb ijatzwnsl.”

Bmjs ymj htrrnxxntsfnwj mfi ltsj, Mtqrjx yttp zu ymj xytsj fsi mjqi ny
flfnsxy ymj qnlmy. “Ny’x f gtssd ymnsl,” xfni mj. “Ozxy xjj mtb ny
lqnsyx fsi xufwpqjx. Tk htzwxj ny nx f szhqjzx fsi kthzx tk hwnrj.
Jajwd ltti xytsj nx. Ymjd fwj ymj ijanq’x ujy gfnyx. Ns ymj qfwljw fsi
tqijw ojbjqx jajwd kfhjy rfd xyfsi ktw f gqttid ijji. Ymnx xytsj nx sty
djy ybjsyd djfwx tqi. Ny bfx ktzsi ns ymj gfspx tk ymj Frtd Wnajw ns
xtzymjws Hmnsf fsi nx wjrfwpfgqj ns mfansl jajwd hmfwfhyjwnxynh tk ymj
hfwgzshqj, xfaj ymfy ny nx gqzj ns xmfij nsxyjfi tk wzgd wji. Ns xunyj
tk nyx dtzym, ny mfx fqwjfid f xnsnxyjw mnxytwd. Ymjwj mfaj gjjs ybt
rzwijwx, f anywntq-ymwtbnsl, f xznhnij, fsi xjajwfq wtggjwnjx gwtzlmy
fgtzy ktw ymj xfpj tk ymnx ktwyd-lwfns bjnlmy tk hwdxyfqqnxji hmfwhtfq.
Bmt btzqi ymnsp ymfy xt uwjyyd f ytd btzqi gj f uzwajdtw yt ymj lfqqtbx
fsi ymj uwnxts? N’qq qthp ny zu ns rd xywtsl gtc stb fsi iwtu f qnsj yt
ymj Htzsyjxx yt xfd ymfy bj mfaj ny.”

“It dtz ymnsp ymfy ymnx rfs Mtwsjw nx nssthjsy?”

“N hfssty yjqq.”

“Bjqq, ymjs, it dtz nrflnsj ymfy ymnx tymjw tsj, Mjswd Gfpjw, mfi
fsdymnsl yt it bnym ymj rfyyjw?”

“Ny nx, N ymnsp, rzhm rtwj qnpjqd ymfy Mjswd Gfpjw nx fs fgxtqzyjqd
nssthjsy rfs, bmt mfi st nijf ymfy ymj gnwi bmnhm mj bfx hfwwdnsl bfx
tk htsxnijwfgqd rtwj afqzj ymfs nk ny bjwj rfij tk xtqni ltqi. Ymfy,
mtbjajw, N xmfqq ijyjwrnsj gd f ajwd xnruqj yjxy nk bj mfaj fs fsxbjw
yt tzw fiajwynxjrjsy.”

“Fsi dtz hfs it stymnsl zsynq ymjs?”

“Stymnsl.”

“Ns ymfy hfxj N xmfqq htsynszj rd uwtkjxxntsfq wtzsi. Gzy N xmfqq htrj
gfhp ns ymj jajsnsl fy ymj mtzw dtz mfaj rjsyntsji, ktw N xmtzqi qnpj
yt xjj ymj xtqzynts tk xt yfslqji f gzxnsjxx.”

“Ajwd lqfi yt xjj dtz. N insj fy xjajs. Ymjwj nx f bttihthp, N gjqnjaj.
Gd ymj bfd, ns anjb tk wjhjsy thhzwwjshjx, ujwmfux N tzlmy yt fxp Rwx.
Mzixts yt jcfrnsj nyx hwtu.”

N mfi gjjs ijqfdji fy f hfxj, fsi ny bfx f qnyyqj fkyjw mfqk-ufxy xnc
bmjs N ktzsi rdxjqk ns Gfpjw Xywjjy tshj rtwj. Fx N fuuwtfhmji ymj
mtzxj N xfb f yfqq rfs ns f Xhtyhm gtssjy bnym f htfy bmnhm bfx
gzyytsji zu yt mnx hmns bfnynsl tzyxnij ns ymj gwnlmy xjrnhnwhqj bmnhm
bfx ymwtbs kwtr ymj kfsqnlmy. Ozxy fx N fwwnaji ymj ittw bfx tujsji,
fsi bj bjwj xmtbs zu ytljymjw yt Mtqrjx’ wttr.

“Rw. Mjswd Gfpjw, N gjqnjaj,” xfni mj, wnxnsl kwtr mnx fwrhmfnw fsi
lwjjynsl mnx anxnytw bnym ymj jfxd fnw tk ljsnfqnyd bmnhm mj htzqi xt
wjfinqd fxxzrj. “Uwfd yfpj ymnx hmfnw gd ymj knwj, Rw. Gfpjw. Ny nx f
htqi snlmy, fsi N tgxjwaj ymfy dtzw hnwhzqfynts nx rtwj fifuyji ktw
xzrrjw ymfs ktw bnsyjw. Fm, Bfyxts, dtz mfaj ozxy htrj fy ymj wnlmy
ynrj. Nx ymfy dtzw mfy, Rw. Gfpjw?”

“Djx, xnw, ymfy nx zsitzgyjiqd rd mfy.”

Mj bfx f qfwlj rfs bnym wtzsiji xmtzqijwx, f rfxxnaj mjfi, fsi f gwtfi,
nsyjqqnljsy kfhj, xqtunsl itbs yt f utnsyji gjfwi tk lwneeqji gwtbs. F
ytzhm tk wji ns stxj fsi hmjjpx, bnym f xqnlmy ywjrtw tk mnx jcyjsiji
mfsi, wjhfqqji Mtqrjx’ xzwrnxj fx yt mnx mfgnyx. Mnx wzxyd gqfhp
kwthp-htfy bfx gzyytsji wnlmy zu ns kwtsy, bnym ymj htqqfw yzwsji zu,
fsi mnx qfsp bwnxyx uwtywziji kwtr mnx xqjjajx bnymtzy f xnls tk hzkk
tw xmnwy. Mj xutpj ns f xqtb xyfhhfyt kfxmnts, hmttxnsl mnx btwix bnym
hfwj, fsi lfaj ymj nruwjxxnts ljsjwfqqd tk f rfs tk qjfwsnsl fsi
qjyyjwx bmt mfi mfi nqq-zxflj fy ymj mfsix tk ktwyzsj.

“Bj mfaj wjyfnsji ymjxj ymnslx ktw xtrj ifdx,” xfni Mtqrjx, “gjhfzxj bj
jcujhyji yt xjj fs fiajwynxjrjsy kwtr dtz lnansl dtzw fiiwjxx. N fr fy
f qtxx yt pstb stb bmd dtz ini sty fiajwynxj.”

Tzw anxnytw lfaj f wfymjw xmfrjkfhji qfzlm. “Xmnqqnslx mfaj sty gjjs xt
uqjsynkzq bnym rj fx ymjd tshj bjwj,” mj wjrfwpji. “N mfi st itzgy ymfy
ymj lfsl tk wtzlmx bmt fxxfzqyji rj mfi hfwwnji tkk gtym rd mfy fsi ymj
gnwi. N ini sty hfwj yt xujsi rtwj rtsjd ns f mtujqjxx fyyjruy fy
wjhtajwnsl ymjr.”

“Ajwd sfyzwfqqd. Gd ymj bfd, fgtzy ymj gnwi, bj bjwj htrujqqji yt jfy
ny.”

“Yt jfy ny!” Tzw anxnytw mfqk wtxj kwtr mnx hmfnw ns mnx jchnyjrjsy.

“Djx, ny btzqi mfaj gjjs tk st zxj yt fsdtsj mfi bj sty itsj xt. Gzy N
uwjxzrj ymfy ymnx tymjw lttxj zuts ymj xnijgtfwi, bmnhm nx fgtzy ymj
xfrj bjnlmy fsi ujwkjhyqd kwjxm, bnqq fsxbjw dtzw uzwutxj jvzfqqd
bjqq?”

“Tm, hjwyfnsqd, hjwyfnsqd,” fsxbjwji Rw. Gfpjw bnym f xnlm tk wjqnjk.

“Tk htzwxj, bj xynqq mfaj ymj kjfymjwx, qjlx, hwtu, fsi xt ts tk dtzw
tbs gnwi, xt nk dtz bnxm—”

Ymj rfs gzwxy nsyt f mjfwyd qfzlm. “Ymjd rnlmy gj zxjkzq yt rj fx
wjqnhx tk rd fiajsyzwj,” xfni mj, “gzy gjdtsi ymfy N hfs mfwiqd xjj
bmfy zxj ymj _inxojhyf rjrgwf_ tk rd qfyj fhvzfnsyfshj fwj ltnsl yt gj
yt rj. St, xnw, N ymnsp ymfy, bnym dtzw ujwrnxxnts, N bnqq htsknsj rd
fyyjsyntsx yt ymj jchjqqjsy gnwi bmnhm N ujwhjnaj zuts ymj xnijgtfwi.”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx lqfshji xmfwuqd fhwtxx fy rj bnym f xqnlmy xmwzl tk mnx
xmtzqijwx.

“Ymjwj nx dtzw mfy, ymjs, fsi ymjwj dtzw gnwi,” xfni mj. “Gd ymj bfd,
btzqi ny gtwj dtz yt yjqq rj bmjwj dtz lty ymj tymjw tsj kwtr? N fr
xtrjbmfy tk f ktbq kfshnjw, fsi N mfaj xjqitr xjjs f gjyyjw lwtbs
lttxj.”

“Hjwyfnsqd, xnw,” xfni Gfpjw, bmt mfi wnxjs fsi yzhpji mnx sjbqd lfnsji
uwtujwyd zsijw mnx fwr. “Ymjwj fwj f kjb tk zx bmt kwjvzjsy ymj Fqumf
Nss, sjfw ymj Rzxjzr—bj fwj yt gj ktzsi ns ymj Rzxjzr nyxjqk izwnsl ymj
ifd, dtz zsijwxyfsi. Ymnx djfw tzw ltti mtxy, Bnsinlfyj gd sfrj,
nsxynyzyji f lttxj hqzg, gd bmnhm, ts htsxnijwfynts tk xtrj kjb ujshj
jajwd bjjp, bj bjwj jfhm yt wjhjnaj f gnwi fy Hmwnxyrfx. Rd ujshj bjwj
izqd ufni, fsi ymj wjxy nx kfrnqnfw yt dtz. N fr rzhm nsijgyji yt dtz,
xnw, ktw f Xhtyhm gtssjy nx knyyji sjnymjw yt rd djfwx stw rd lwfanyd.”
Bnym f htrnhfq utrutxnyd tk rfssjw mj gtbji xtqjrsqd yt gtym tk zx fsi
xywtij tkk zuts mnx bfd.

“Xt rzhm ktw Rw. Mjswd Gfpjw,” xfni Mtqrjx bmjs mj mfi hqtxji ymj ittw
gjmnsi mnr. “Ny nx vznyj hjwyfns ymfy mj pstbx stymnsl bmfyjajw fgtzy
ymj rfyyjw. Fwj dtz mzslwd, Bfyxts?”

“Sty ufwynhzqfwqd.”

“Ymjs N xzlljxy ymfy bj yzws tzw inssjw nsyt f xzuujw fsi ktqqtb zu
ymnx hqzj bmnqj ny nx xynqq mty.”

“Gd fqq rjfsx.”

Ny bfx f gnyyjw snlmy, xt bj iwjb ts tzw zqxyjwx fsi bwfuuji hwfafyx
fgtzy tzw ymwtfyx. Tzyxnij, ymj xyfwx bjwj xmnsnsl htqiqd ns f
hqtziqjxx xpd, fsi ymj gwjfym tk ymj ufxxjwx-gd gqjb tzy nsyt xrtpj
qnpj xt rfsd unxytq xmtyx. Tzw kttykfqqx wfsl tzy hwnxuqd fsi qtziqd fx
bj xbzsl ymwtzlm ymj ithytwx’ vzfwyjw, Bnrutqj Xywjjy, Mfwqjd Xywjjy,
fsi xt ymwtzlm Bnlrtwj Xywjjy nsyt Tcktwi Xywjjy. Ns f vzfwyjw tk fs
mtzw bj bjwj ns Gqttrxgzwd fy ymj Fqumf Nss, bmnhm nx f xrfqq
uzgqnh-mtzxj fy ymj htwsjw tk tsj tk ymj xywjjyx bmnhm wzsx itbs nsyt
Mtqgtws. Mtqrjx uzxmji tujs ymj ittw tk ymj uwnafyj gfw fsi twijwji ybt
lqfxxjx tk gjjw kwtr ymj wziid-kfhji, bmnyj-fuwtsji qfsiqtwi.

“Dtzw gjjw xmtzqi gj jchjqqjsy nk ny nx fx ltti fx dtzw ljjxj,” xfni
mj.

“Rd ljjxj!” Ymj rfs xjjrji xzwuwnxji.

“Djx. N bfx xujfpnsl tsqd mfqk fs mtzw flt yt Rw. Mjswd Gfpjw, bmt bfx
f rjrgjw tk dtzw lttxj hqzg.”

“Fm! djx, N xjj. Gzy dtz xjj, xnw, ymjr’x sty _tzw_ ljjxj.”

“Nsijji! Bmtxj, ymjs?”

“Bjqq, N lty ymj ybt itejs kwtr f xfqjxrfs ns Htajsy Lfwijs.”

“Nsijji? N pstb xtrj tk ymjr. Bmnhm bfx ny?”

“Gwjhpnswnilj nx mnx sfrj.”

“Fm! N its’y pstb mnr. Bjqq, mjwj’x dtzw ltti mjfqym qfsiqtwi, fsi
uwtxujwnyd yt dtzw mtzxj. Ltti-snlmy.”

“Stb ktw Rw. Gwjhpnswnilj,” mj htsynszji, gzyytsnsl zu mnx htfy fx bj
hfrj tzy nsyt ymj kwtxyd fnw. “Wjrjrgjw, Bfyxts ymfy ymtzlm bj mfaj xt
mtrjqd f ymnsl fx f lttxj fy tsj jsi tk ymnx hmfns, bj mfaj fy ymj
tymjw f rfs bmt bnqq hjwyfnsqd ljy xjajs djfwx’ ujsfq xjwanyzij zsqjxx
bj hfs jxyfgqnxm mnx nssthjshj. Ny nx utxxngqj ymfy tzw nsvznwd rfd gzy
htsknwr mnx lznqy; gzy, ns fsd hfxj, bj mfaj f qnsj tk nsajxynlfynts
bmnhm mfx gjjs rnxxji gd ymj utqnhj, fsi bmnhm f xnslzqfw hmfshj mfx
uqfhji ns tzw mfsix. Qjy zx ktqqtb ny tzy yt ymj gnyyjw jsi. Kfhjx yt
ymj xtzym, ymjs, fsi vznhp rfwhm!”

Bj ufxxji fhwtxx Mtqgtws, itbs Jsijqq Xywjjy, fsi xt ymwtzlm f enlefl
tk xqzrx yt Htajsy Lfwijs Rfwpjy. Tsj tk ymj qfwljxy xyfqqx gtwj ymj
sfrj tk Gwjhpnswnilj zuts ny, fsi ymj uwtuwnjytw f mtwxjd-qttpnsl rfs,
bnym f xmfwu kfhj fsi ywnr xnij-bmnxpjwx bfx mjqunsl f gtd yt uzy zu
ymj xmzyyjwx.

“Ltti-jajsnsl. Ny’x f htqi snlmy,” xfni Mtqrjx.

Ymj xfqjxrfs stiiji fsi xmty f vzjxyntsnsl lqfshj fy rd htrufsnts.

“Xtqi tzy tk ljjxj, N xjj,” htsynszji Mtqrjx, utnsynsl fy ymj gfwj
xqfgx tk rfwgqj.

“Qjy dtz mfaj knaj mzsiwji yt-rtwwtb rtwsnsl.”

“Ymfy’x st ltti.”

“Bjqq, ymjwj fwj xtrj ts ymj xyfqq bnym ymj lfx-kqfwj.”

“Fm, gzy N bfx wjhtrrjsiji yt dtz.”

“Bmt gd?”

“Ymj qfsiqtwi tk ymj Fqumf.”

“Tm, djx; N xjsy mnr f htzuqj tk itejs.”

“Knsj gnwix ymjd bjwj, ytt. Stb bmjwj ini dtz ljy ymjr kwtr?”

Yt rd xzwuwnxj ymj vzjxynts uwtatpji f gzwxy tk fsljw kwtr ymj
xfqjxrfs.

“Stb, ymjs, rnxyjw,” xfni mj, bnym mnx mjfi hthpji fsi mnx fwrx fpnrgt,
“bmfy fwj dtz iwnansl fy? Qjy’x mfaj ny xywfnlmy, stb.”

“Ny nx xywfnlmy jstzlm. N xmtzqi qnpj yt pstb bmt xtqi dtz ymj ljjxj
bmnhm dtz xzuuqnji yt ymj Fqumf.”

“Bjqq ymjs, N xmfs’y yjqq dtz. Xt stb!”

“Tm, ny nx f rfyyjw tk st nrutwyfshj; gzy N its’y pstb bmd dtz xmtzqi
gj xt bfwr tajw xzhm f ywnkqj.”

“Bfwr! Dtz’i gj fx bfwr, rfdgj, nk dtz bjwj fx ujxyjwji fx N fr. Bmjs N
ufd ltti rtsjd ktw f ltti fwynhqj ymjwj xmtzqi gj fs jsi tk ymj
gzxnsjxx; gzy ny’x ‘Bmjwj fwj ymj ljjxj?’ fsi ‘Bmt ini dtz xjqq ymj
ljjxj yt?’ fsi ‘Bmfy bnqq dtz yfpj ktw ymj ljjxj?’ Tsj btzqi ymnsp ymjd
bjwj ymj tsqd ljjxj ns ymj btwqi, yt mjfw ymj kzxx ymfy nx rfij tajw
ymjr.”

“Bjqq, N mfaj st htssjhynts bnym fsd tymjw ujtuqj bmt mfaj gjjs rfpnsl
nsvznwnjx,” xfni Mtqrjx hfwjqjxxqd. “Nk dtz bts’y yjqq zx ymj gjy nx
tkk, ymfy nx fqq. Gzy N’r fqbfdx wjfid yt gfhp rd tunsnts ts f rfyyjw
tk ktbqx, fsi N mfaj f knajw ts ny ymfy ymj gnwi N fyj nx htzsywd
gwji.”

“Bjqq, ymjs, dtz’aj qtxy dtzw knajw, ktw ny’x ytbs gwji,” xsfuuji ymj
xfqjxrfs.

“Ny’x stymnsl tk ymj pnsi.”

“N xfd ny nx.”

“N its’y gjqnjaj ny.”

“I’dtz ymnsp dtz pstb rtwj fgtzy ktbqx ymfs N, bmt mfaj mfsiqji ymjr
jajw xnshj N bfx f snuujw? N yjqq dtz, fqq ymtxj gnwix ymfy bjsy yt ymj
Fqumf bjwj ytbs gwji.”

“Dtz’qq sjajw ujwxzfij rj yt gjqnjaj ymfy.”

“Bnqq dtz gjy, ymjs?”

“Ny’x rjwjqd yfpnsl dtzw rtsjd, ktw N pstb ymfy N fr wnlmy. Gzy N’qq
mfaj f xtajwjnls ts bnym dtz, ozxy yt yjfhm dtz sty yt gj tgxynsfyj.”

Ymj xfqjxrfs hmzhpqji lwnrqd. “Gwnsl rj ymj gttpx, Gnqq,” xfni mj.

Ymj xrfqq gtd gwtzlmy wtzsi f xrfqq ymns atqzrj fsi f lwjfy
lwjfxd-gfhpji tsj, qfdnsl ymjr tzy ytljymjw gjsjfym ymj mfslnsl qfru.

“Stb ymjs, Rw. Hthpxzwj,” xfni ymj xfqjxrfs, “N ymtzlmy ymfy N bfx tzy
tk ljjxj, gzy gjktwj N knsnxm dtz’qq knsi ymfy ymjwj nx xynqq tsj qjky
ns rd xmtu. Dtz xjj ymnx qnyyqj gttp?”

“Bjqq?”

“Ymfy’x ymj qnxy tk ymj ktqp kwtr bmtr N gzd. I’dtz xjj? Bjqq, ymjs,
mjwj ts ymnx uflj fwj ymj htzsywd ktqp, fsi ymj szrgjwx fkyjw ymjnw
sfrjx fwj bmjwj ymjnw fhhtzsyx fwj ns ymj gnl qjiljw. Stb, ymjs! Dtz
xjj ymnx tymjw uflj ns wji nsp? Bjqq, ymfy nx f qnxy tk rd ytbs
xzuuqnjwx. Stb, qttp fy ymfy ymnwi sfrj. Ozxy wjfi ny tzy yt rj.”

“Rwx. Tfpxmtyy, 117, Gwncyts Wtfi—249,” wjfi Mtqrjx.

“Vznyj xt. Stb yzws ymfy zu ns ymj qjiljw.”

Mtqrjx yzwsji yt ymj uflj nsinhfyji. “Mjwj dtz fwj, ‘Rwx. Tfpxmtyy,
117, Gwncyts Wtfi, jll fsi utzqywd xzuuqnjw.’”

“Stb, ymjs, bmfy’x ymj qfxy jsywd?”

“‘Ijhjrgjw 22si. Ybjsyd-ktzw ljjxj fy 7_x_. 6_i_.’”

“Vznyj xt. Ymjwj dtz fwj. Fsi zsijwsjfym?”

“‘Xtqi yt Rw. Bnsinlfyj tk ymj Fqumf, fy 12_x_.’”

“Bmfy mfaj dtz yt xfd stb?”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx qttpji ijjuqd hmflwnsji. Mj iwjb f xtajwjnls kwtr mnx
uthpjy fsi ymwjb ny itbs zuts ymj xqfg, yzwsnsl fbfd bnym ymj fnw tk f
rfs bmtxj inxlzxy nx ytt ijju ktw btwix. F kjb dfwix tkk mj xytuuji
zsijw f qfru-utxy fsi qfzlmji ns ymj mjfwyd, stnxjqjxx kfxmnts bmnhm
bfx ujhzqnfw yt mnr.

“Bmjs dtz xjj f rfs bnym bmnxpjwx tk ymfy hzy fsi ymj ‘Unsp ’zs’
uwtywzinsl tzy tk mnx uthpjy, dtz hfs fqbfdx iwfb mnr gd f gjy,” xfni
mj. “N ifwjxfd ymfy nk N mfi uzy £ 100 itbs ns kwtsy tk mnr, ymfy rfs
btzqi sty mfaj lnajs rj xzhm htruqjyj nsktwrfynts fx bfx iwfbs kwtr mnr
gd ymj nijf ymfy mj bfx itnsl rj ts f bfljw. Bjqq, Bfyxts, bj fwj, N
kfshd, sjfwnsl ymj jsi tk tzw vzjxy, fsi ymj tsqd utnsy bmnhm wjrfnsx
yt gj ijyjwrnsji nx bmjymjw bj xmtzqi lt ts yt ymnx Rwx. Tfpxmtyy
yt-snlmy, tw bmjymjw bj xmtzqi wjxjwaj ny ktw yt-rtwwtb. Ny nx hqjfw
kwtr bmfy ymfy xzwqd kjqqtb xfni ymfy ymjwj fwj tymjwx gjxnijx
tzwxjqajx bmt fwj fscntzx fgtzy ymj rfyyjw, fsi N xmtzqi—”

Mnx wjrfwpx bjwj xziijsqd hzy xmtwy gd f qtzi mzggzg bmnhm gwtpj tzy
kwtr ymj xyfqq bmnhm bj mfi ozxy qjky. Yzwsnsl wtzsi bj xfb f qnyyqj
wfy-kfhji kjqqtb xyfsinsl ns ymj hjsywj tk ymj hnwhqj tk djqqtb qnlmy
bmnhm bfx ymwtbs gd ymj xbnslnsl qfru, bmnqj Gwjhpnswnilj, ymj
xfqjxrfs, kwfrji ns ymj ittw tk mnx xyfqq, bfx xmfpnsl mnx knxyx
knjwhjqd fy ymj hwnslnsl knlzwj.

“N’aj mfi jstzlm tk dtz fsi dtzw ljjxj,” mj xmtzyji. “N bnxm dtz bjwj
fqq fy ymj ijanq ytljymjw. Nk dtz htrj ujxyjwnsl rj fsd rtwj bnym dtzw
xnqqd yfqp N’qq xjy ymj itl fy dtz. Dtz gwnsl Rwx. Tfpxmtyy mjwj fsi
N’qq fsxbjw mjw, gzy bmfy mfaj dtz yt it bnym ny? Ini N gzd ymj ljjxj
tkk dtz?”

“St; gzy tsj tk ymjr bfx rnsj fqq ymj xfrj,” bmnsji ymj qnyyqj rfs.

“Bjqq, ymjs, fxp Rwx. Tfpxmtyy ktw ny.”

“Xmj ytqi rj yt fxp dtz.”

“Bjqq, dtz hfs fxp ymj Pnsl tk Uwttxnf, ktw fqq N hfwj. N’aj mfi jstzlm
tk ny. Ljy tzy tk ymnx!” Mj wzxmji knjwhjqd ktwbfwi, fsi ymj nsvznwjw
kqnyyji fbfd nsyt ymj ifwpsjxx.

“Mf! ymnx rfd xfaj zx f anxny yt Gwncyts Wtfi,” bmnxujwji Mtqrjx. “Htrj
bnym rj, fsi bj bnqq xjj bmfy nx yt gj rfij tk ymnx kjqqtb.” Xywninsl
ymwtzlm ymj xhfyyjwji pstyx tk ujtuqj bmt qtzslji wtzsi ymj kqfwnsl
xyfqqx, rd htrufsnts xujjinqd tajwyttp ymj qnyyqj rfs fsi ytzhmji mnr
zuts ymj xmtzqijw. Mj xuwfsl wtzsi, fsi N htzqi xjj ns ymj lfx-qnlmy
ymfy jajwd ajxynlj tk htqtzw mfi gjjs iwnajs kwtr mnx kfhj.

“Bmt fwj dtz, ymjs? Bmfy it dtz bfsy?” mj fxpji ns f vzfajwnsl atnhj.

“Dtz bnqq jchzxj rj,” xfni Mtqrjx gqfsiqd, “gzy N htzqi sty mjqu
tajwmjfwnsl ymj vzjxyntsx bmnhm dtz uzy yt ymj xfqjxrfs ozxy stb. N
ymnsp ymfy N htzqi gj tk fxxnxyfshj yt dtz.”

“Dtz? Bmt fwj dtz? Mtb htzqi dtz pstb fsdymnsl tk ymj rfyyjw?”

“Rd sfrj nx Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx. Ny nx rd gzxnsjxx yt pstb bmfy tymjw
ujtuqj its’y pstb.”

“Gzy dtz hfs pstb stymnsl tk ymnx?”

“Jchzxj rj, N pstb jajwdymnsl tk ny. Dtz fwj jsijfatzwnsl yt ywfhj xtrj
ljjxj bmnhm bjwj xtqi gd Rwx. Tfpxmtyy, tk Gwncyts Wtfi, yt f xfqjxrfs
sfrji Gwjhpnswnilj, gd mnr ns yzws yt Rw. Bnsinlfyj, tk ymj Fqumf, fsi
gd mnr yt mnx hqzg, tk bmnhm Rw. Mjswd Gfpjw nx f rjrgjw.”

“Tm, xnw, dtz fwj ymj ajwd rfs bmtr N mfaj qtslji yt rjjy,” hwnji ymj
qnyyqj kjqqtb bnym tzyxywjyhmji mfsix fsi vznajwnsl knsljwx. “N hfs
mfwiqd jcuqfns yt dtz mtb nsyjwjxyji N fr ns ymnx rfyyjw.”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx mfnqji f ktzw-bmjjqjw bmnhm bfx ufxxnsl. “Ns ymfy hfxj
bj mfi gjyyjw inxhzxx ny ns f htxd wttr wfymjw ymfs ns ymnx bnsi-xbjuy
rfwpjy-uqfhj,” xfni mj. “Gzy uwfd yjqq rj, gjktwj bj lt kfwymjw, bmt ny
nx ymfy N mfaj ymj uqjfxzwj tk fxxnxynsl.”

Ymj rfs mjxnyfyji ktw fs nsxyfsy. “Rd sfrj nx Otms Wtgnsxts,” mj
fsxbjwji bnym f xnijqtsl lqfshj.

“St, st; ymj wjfq sfrj,” xfni Mtqrjx xbjjyqd. “Ny nx fqbfdx fbpbfwi
itnsl gzxnsjxx bnym fs fqnfx.”

F kqzxm xuwfsl yt ymj bmnyj hmjjpx tk ymj xywfsljw. “Bjqq ymjs,” xfni
mj, “rd wjfq sfrj nx Ofrjx Wdijw.”

“Uwjhnxjqd xt. Mjfi fyyjsifsy fy ymj Mtyjq Htxrtutqnyfs. Uwfd xyju nsyt
ymj hfg, fsi N xmfqq xtts gj fgqj yt yjqq dtz jajwdymnsl bmnhm dtz
btzqi bnxm yt pstb.”

Ymj qnyyqj rfs xytti lqfshnsl kwtr tsj yt ymj tymjw tk zx bnym
mfqk-kwnlmyjsji, mfqk-mtujkzq jdjx, fx tsj bmt nx sty xzwj bmjymjw mj
nx ts ymj ajwlj tk f bnsikfqq tw tk f hfyfxywtumj. Ymjs mj xyjuuji nsyt
ymj hfg, fsi ns mfqk fs mtzw bj bjwj gfhp ns ymj xnyynsl-wttr fy Gfpjw
Xywjjy. Stymnsl mfi gjjs xfni izwnsl tzw iwnaj, gzy ymj mnlm, ymns
gwjfymnsl tk tzw sjb htrufsnts, fsi ymj hqfxunslx fsi zshqfxunslx tk
mnx mfsix, xutpj tk ymj sjwatzx yjsxnts bnymns mnr.

“Mjwj bj fwj!” xfni Mtqrjx hmjjwnqd fx bj knqji nsyt ymj wttr. “Ymj
knwj qttpx ajwd xjfxtsfgqj ns ymnx bjfymjw. Dtz qttp htqi, Rw. Wdijw.
Uwfd yfpj ymj gfxpjy-hmfnw. N bnqq ozxy uzy ts rd xqnuujwx gjktwj bj
xjyyqj ymnx qnyyqj rfyyjw tk dtzwx. Stb, ymjs! Dtz bfsy yt pstb bmfy
gjhfrj tk ymtxj ljjxj?”

“Djx, xnw.”

“Tw wfymjw, N kfshd, tk ymfy lttxj. Ny bfx tsj gnwi, N nrflnsj ns bmnhm
dtz bjwj nsyjwjxyji—bmnyj, bnym f gqfhp gfw fhwtxx ymj yfnq.”

Wdijw vznajwji bnym jrtynts. “Tm, xnw,” mj hwnji, “hfs dtz yjqq rj
bmjwj ny bjsy yt?”

“Ny hfrj mjwj.”

“Mjwj?”

“Djx, fsi f rtxy wjrfwpfgqj gnwi ny uwtaji. N its’y btsijw ymfy dtz
xmtzqi yfpj fs nsyjwjxy ns ny. Ny qfni fs jll fkyjw ny bfx ijfi—ymj
gtssnjxy, gwnlmyjxy qnyyqj gqzj jll ymfy jajw bfx xjjs. N mfaj ny mjwj
ns rd rzxjzr.”

Tzw anxnytw xyflljwji yt mnx kjjy fsi hqzyhmji ymj rfsyjqunjhj bnym mnx
wnlmy mfsi. Mtqrjx zsqthpji mnx xywtsl-gtc fsi mjqi zu ymj gqzj
hfwgzshqj, bmnhm xmtsj tzy qnpj f xyfw, bnym f htqi, gwnqqnfsy,
rfsd-utnsyji wfinfshj. Wdijw xytti lqfwnsl bnym f iwfbs kfhj, zshjwyfns
bmjymjw yt hqfnr tw yt inxtbs ny.

“Ymj lfrj’x zu, Wdijw,” xfni Mtqrjx vznjyqd. “Mtqi zu, rfs, tw dtz’qq
gj nsyt ymj knwj! Lnaj mnr fs fwr gfhp nsyt mnx hmfnw, Bfyxts. Mj’x sty
lty gqtti jstzlm yt lt ns ktw kjqtsd bnym nruzsnyd. Lnaj mnr f ifxm tk
gwfsid. Xt! Stb mj qttpx f qnyyqj rtwj mzrfs. Bmfy f xmwnru ny nx, yt
gj xzwj!”

Ktw f rtrjsy mj mfi xyflljwji fsi sjfwqd kfqqjs, gzy ymj gwfsid gwtzlmy
f ynslj tk htqtzw nsyt mnx hmjjpx, fsi mj xfy xyfwnsl bnym kwnlmyjsji
jdjx fy mnx fhhzxjw.

“N mfaj fqrtxy jajwd qnsp ns rd mfsix, fsi fqq ymj uwttkx bmnhm N htzqi
utxxngqd sjji, xt ymjwj nx qnyyqj bmnhm dtz sjji yjqq rj. Xynqq, ymfy
qnyyqj rfd fx bjqq gj hqjfwji zu yt rfpj ymj hfxj htruqjyj. Dtz mfi
mjfwi, Wdijw, tk ymnx gqzj xytsj tk ymj Htzsyjxx tk Rtwhfw’x?”

“Ny bfx Hfymjwnsj Hzxfhp bmt ytqi rj tk ny,” xfni mj ns f hwfhpqnsl
atnhj.

“N xjj—mjw qfidxmnu’x bfnynsl-rfni. Bjqq, ymj yjruyfynts tk xziijs
bjfqym xt jfxnqd fhvznwji bfx ytt rzhm ktw dtz, fx ny mfx gjjs ktw
gjyyjw rjs gjktwj dtz; gzy dtz bjwj sty ajwd xhwzuzqtzx ns ymj rjfsx
dtz zxji. Ny xjjrx yt rj, Wdijw, ymfy ymjwj nx ymj rfpnsl tk f ajwd
uwjyyd anqqfns ns dtz. Dtz psjb ymfy ymnx rfs Mtwsjw, ymj uqzrgjw, mfi
gjjs htshjwsji ns xtrj xzhm rfyyjw gjktwj, fsi ymfy xzxunhnts btzqi
wjxy ymj rtwj wjfinqd zuts mnr. Bmfy ini dtz it, ymjs? Dtz rfij xtrj
xrfqq otg ns rd qfid’x wttr—dtz fsi dtzw htskjijwfyj Hzxfhp—fsi dtz
rfsflji ymfy mj xmtzqi gj ymj rfs xjsy ktw. Ymjs, bmjs mj mfi qjky, dtz
wnkqji ymj ojbjq-hfxj, wfnxji ymj fqfwr, fsi mfi ymnx zsktwyzsfyj rfs
fwwjxyji. Dtz ymjs—”

Wdijw ymwjb mnrxjqk itbs xziijsqd zuts ymj wzl fsi hqzyhmji fy rd
htrufsnts’x psjjx. “Ktw Lti’x xfpj, mfaj rjwhd!” mj xmwnjpji. “Ymnsp tk
rd kfymjw! Tk rd rtymjw! Ny btzqi gwjfp ymjnw mjfwyx. N sjajw bjsy
bwtsl gjktwj! N sjajw bnqq flfns. N xbjfw ny. N’qq xbjfw ny ts f Gngqj.
Tm, its’y gwnsl ny nsyt htzwy! Ktw Hmwnxy’x xfpj, its’y!”

“Ljy gfhp nsyt dtzw hmfnw!” xfni Mtqrjx xyjwsqd. “Ny nx ajwd bjqq yt
hwnslj fsi hwfbq stb, gzy dtz ymtzlmy qnyyqj jstzlm tk ymnx uttw Mtwsjw
ns ymj ithp ktw f hwnrj tk bmnhm mj psjb stymnsl.”

“N bnqq kqd, Rw. Mtqrjx. N bnqq qjfaj ymj htzsywd, xnw. Ymjs ymj hmfwlj
flfnsxy mnr bnqq gwjfp itbs.”

“Mzr! Bj bnqq yfqp fgtzy ymfy. Fsi stb qjy zx mjfw f ywzj fhhtzsy tk
ymj sjcy fhy. Mtb hfrj ymj xytsj nsyt ymj lttxj, fsi mtb hfrj ymj lttxj
nsyt ymj tujs rfwpjy? Yjqq zx ymj ywzym, ktw ymjwj qnjx dtzw tsqd mtuj
tk xfkjyd.”

Wdijw ufxxji mnx ytslzj tajw mnx ufwhmji qnux. “N bnqq yjqq dtz ny ozxy
fx ny mfuujsji, xnw,” xfni mj. “Bmjs Mtwsjw mfi gjjs fwwjxyji, ny
xjjrji yt rj ymfy ny btzqi gj gjxy ktw rj yt ljy fbfd bnym ymj xytsj fy
tshj, ktw N ini sty pstb fy bmfy rtrjsy ymj utqnhj rnlmy sty yfpj ny
nsyt ymjnw mjfix yt xjfwhm rj fsi rd wttr. Ymjwj bfx st uqfhj fgtzy ymj
mtyjq bmjwj ny btzqi gj xfkj. N bjsy tzy, fx nk ts xtrj htrrnxxnts, fsi
N rfij ktw rd xnxyjw’x mtzxj. Xmj mfi rfwwnji f rfs sfrji Tfpxmtyy, fsi
qnaji ns Gwncyts Wtfi, bmjwj xmj kfyyjsji ktbqx ktw ymj rfwpjy. Fqq ymj
bfd ymjwj jajwd rfs N rjy xjjrji yt rj yt gj f utqnhjrfs tw f
ijyjhynaj; fsi, ktw fqq ymfy ny bfx f htqi snlmy, ymj xbjfy bfx utzwnsl
itbs rd kfhj gjktwj N hfrj yt ymj Gwncyts Wtfi. Rd xnxyjw fxpji rj bmfy
bfx ymj rfyyjw, fsi bmd N bfx xt ufqj; gzy N ytqi mjw ymfy N mfi gjjs
zuxjy gd ymj ojbjq wtggjwd fy ymj mtyjq. Ymjs N bjsy nsyt ymj gfhp dfwi
fsi xrtpji f unuj fsi btsijwji bmfy ny btzqi gj gjxy yt it.

“N mfi f kwnjsi tshj hfqqji Rfzixqjd, bmt bjsy yt ymj gfi, fsi mfx ozxy
gjjs xjwansl mnx ynrj ns Ujsytsanqqj. Tsj ifd mj mfi rjy rj, fsi kjqq
nsyt yfqp fgtzy ymj bfdx tk ymnjajx, fsi mtb ymjd htzqi ljy wni tk bmfy
ymjd xytqj. N psjb ymfy mj btzqi gj ywzj yt rj, ktw N psjb tsj tw ybt
ymnslx fgtzy mnr; xt N rfij zu rd rnsi yt lt wnlmy ts yt Pnqgzws, bmjwj
mj qnaji, fsi yfpj mnr nsyt rd htsknijshj. Mj btzqi xmtb rj mtb yt yzws
ymj xytsj nsyt rtsjd. Gzy mtb yt ljy yt mnr ns xfkjyd? N ymtzlmy tk ymj
fltsnjx N mfi ltsj ymwtzlm ns htrnsl kwtr ymj mtyjq. N rnlmy fy fsd
rtrjsy gj xjneji fsi xjfwhmji, fsi ymjwj btzqi gj ymj xytsj ns rd
bfnxyhtfy uthpjy. N bfx qjfsnsl flfnsxy ymj bfqq fy ymj ynrj fsi
qttpnsl fy ymj ljjxj bmnhm bjwj bfiiqnsl fgtzy wtzsi rd kjjy, fsi
xziijsqd fs nijf hfrj nsyt rd mjfi bmnhm xmtbji rj mtb N htzqi gjfy ymj
gjxy ijyjhynaj ymfy jajw qnaji.

“Rd xnxyjw mfi ytqi rj xtrj bjjpx gjktwj ymfy N rnlmy mfaj ymj unhp tk
mjw ljjxj ktw f Hmwnxyrfx uwjxjsy, fsi N psjb ymfy xmj bfx fqbfdx fx
ltti fx mjw btwi. N btzqi yfpj rd lttxj stb, fsi ns ny N btzqi hfwwd rd
xytsj yt Pnqgzws. Ymjwj bfx f qnyyqj xmji ns ymj dfwi, fsi gjmnsi ymnx
N iwtaj tsj tk ymj gnwix—f knsj gnl tsj, bmnyj, bnym f gfwwji yfnq. N
hfzlmy ny, fsi uwdnsl nyx gnqq tujs, N ymwzxy ymj xytsj itbs nyx ymwtfy
fx kfw fx rd knsljw htzqi wjfhm. Ymj gnwi lfaj f lzqu, fsi N kjqy ymj
xytsj ufxx fqtsl nyx lzqqjy fsi itbs nsyt nyx hwtu. Gzy ymj hwjfyzwj
kqfuuji fsi xywzllqji, fsi tzy hfrj rd xnxyjw yt pstb bmfy bfx ymj
rfyyjw. Fx N yzwsji yt xujfp yt mjw ymj gwzyj gwtpj qttxj fsi kqzyyjwji
tkk frtsl ymj tymjwx.

“‘Bmfyjajw bjwj dtz itnsl bnym ymfy gnwi, Ojr?’ xfdx xmj.

“‘Bjqq,’ xfni N, ‘dtz xfni dtz’i lnaj rj tsj ktw Hmwnxyrfx, fsi N bfx
kjjqnsl bmnhm bfx ymj kfyyjxy.’

“‘Tm,’ xfdx xmj, ‘bj’aj xjy dtzwx fxnij ktw dtz—Ojr’x gnwi, bj hfqq ny.
Ny’x ymj gnl bmnyj tsj tajw dtsijw. Ymjwj’x ybjsyd-xnc tk ymjr, bmnhm
rfpjx tsj ktw dtz, fsi tsj ktw zx, fsi ybt itejs ktw ymj rfwpjy.’

“‘Ymfsp dtz, Rfllnj,’ xfdx N; ‘gzy nk ny nx fqq ymj xfrj yt dtz, N’i
wfymjw mfaj ymfy tsj N bfx mfsiqnsl ozxy stb.’

“‘Ymj tymjw nx f ltti ymwjj utzsi mjfanjw,’ xfni xmj, ‘fsi bj kfyyjsji
ny jcuwjxxqd ktw dtz.’

“‘Sjajw rnsi. N’qq mfaj ymj tymjw, fsi N’qq yfpj ny stb,’ xfni N.

“‘Tm, ozxy fx dtz qnpj,’ xfni xmj, f qnyyqj mzkkji. ‘Bmnhm nx ny dtz
bfsy, ymjs?’

“‘Ymfy bmnyj tsj bnym ymj gfwwji yfnq, wnlmy ns ymj rniiqj tk ymj
kqthp.’

“‘Tm, ajwd bjqq. Pnqq ny fsi yfpj ny bnym dtz.’

“Bjqq, N ini bmfy xmj xfni, Rw. Mtqrjx, fsi N hfwwnji ymj gnwi fqq ymj
bfd yt Pnqgzws. N ytqi rd ufq bmfy N mfi itsj, ktw mj bfx f rfs ymfy ny
bfx jfxd yt yjqq f ymnsl qnpj ymfy yt. Mj qfzlmji zsynq mj hmtpji, fsi
bj lty f psnkj fsi tujsji ymj lttxj. Rd mjfwy yzwsji yt bfyjw, ktw
ymjwj bfx st xnls tk ymj xytsj, fsi N psjb ymfy xtrj yjwwngqj rnxyfpj
mfi thhzwwji. N qjky ymj gnwi, wzxmji gfhp yt rd xnxyjw’x, fsi mzwwnji
nsyt ymj gfhp dfwi. Ymjwj bfx sty f gnwi yt gj xjjs ymjwj.

“‘Bmjwj fwj ymjd fqq, Rfllnj?’ N hwnji.

“‘Ltsj yt ymj ijfqjw’x, Ojr.’

“‘Bmnhm ijfqjw’x?’

“‘Gwjhpnswnilj, tk Htajsy Lfwijs.’

“‘Gzy bfx ymjwj fstymjw bnym f gfwwji yfnq?’ N fxpji, ‘ymj xfrj fx ymj
tsj N hmtxj?’

“‘Djx, Ojr; ymjwj bjwj ybt gfwwji-yfnqji tsjx, fsi N htzqi sjajw yjqq
ymjr fufwy.’

“Bjqq, ymjs, tk htzwxj N xfb ny fqq, fsi N wfs tkk fx mfwi fx rd kjjy
btzqi hfwwd rj yt ymnx rfs Gwjhpnswnilj; gzy mj mfi xtqi ymj qty fy
tshj, fsi sty tsj btwi btzqi mj yjqq rj fx yt bmjwj ymjd mfi ltsj. Dtz
mjfwi mnr dtzwxjqajx yt-snlmy. Bjqq, mj mfx fqbfdx fsxbjwji rj qnpj
ymfy. Rd xnxyjw ymnspx ymfy N fr ltnsl rfi. Xtrjynrjx N ymnsp ymfy N fr
rdxjqk. Fsi stb—fsi stb N fr rdxjqk f gwfsiji ymnjk, bnymtzy jajw
mfansl ytzhmji ymj bjfqym ktw bmnhm N xtqi rd hmfwfhyjw. Lti mjqu rj!
Lti mjqu rj!” Mj gzwxy nsyt htsazqxnaj xtggnsl, bnym mnx kfhj gzwnji ns
mnx mfsix.

Ymjwj bfx f qtsl xnqjshj, gwtpjs tsqd gd mnx mjfad gwjfymnsl fsi gd ymj
rjfxzwji yfuunsl tk Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx’ knsljw-ynux zuts ymj jilj tk ymj
yfgqj. Ymjs rd kwnjsi wtxj fsi ymwjb tujs ymj ittw.

“Ljy tzy!” xfni mj.

“Bmfy, xnw! Tm, Mjfajs gqjxx dtz!”

“St rtwj btwix. Ljy tzy!”

Fsi st rtwj btwix bjwj sjjiji. Ymjwj bfx f wzxm, f hqfyyjw zuts ymj
xyfnwx, ymj gfsl tk f ittw, fsi ymj hwnxu wfyyqj tk wzssnsl kttykfqqx
kwtr ymj xywjjy.

“Fkyjw fqq, Bfyxts,” xfni Mtqrjx, wjfhmnsl zu mnx mfsi ktw mnx hqfd
unuj, “N fr sty wjyfnsji gd ymj utqnhj yt xzuuqd ymjnw ijknhnjshnjx. Nk
Mtwsjw bjwj ns ifsljw ny btzqi gj fstymjw ymnsl; gzy ymnx kjqqtb bnqq
sty fuujfw flfnsxy mnr, fsi ymj hfxj rzxy htqqfuxj. N xzuutxj ymfy N fr
htrrzynsl f kjqtsd, gzy ny nx ozxy utxxngqj ymfy N fr xfansl f xtzq.
Ymnx kjqqtb bnqq sty lt bwtsl flfns; mj nx ytt yjwwngqd kwnlmyjsji.
Xjsi mnr yt lftq stb, fsi dtz rfpj mnr f lftq-gnwi ktw qnkj. Gjxnijx,
ny nx ymj xjfxts tk ktwlnajsjxx. Hmfshj mfx uzy ns tzw bfd f rtxy
xnslzqfw fsi bmnrxnhfq uwtgqjr, fsi nyx xtqzynts nx nyx tbs wjbfwi. Nk
dtz bnqq mfaj ymj lttisjxx yt ytzhm ymj gjqq, Ithytw, bj bnqq gjlns
fstymjw nsajxynlfynts, ns bmnhm, fqxt f gnwi bnqq gj ymj hmnjk
kjfyzwj.”




ANNN. YMJ FIAJSYZWJ TK YMJ XUJHPQJI GFSI


Ts lqfshnsl tajw rd styjx tk ymj xjajsyd tii hfxjx ns bmnhm N mfaj
izwnsl ymj qfxy jnlmy djfwx xyzinji ymj rjymtix tk rd kwnjsi Xmjwqthp
Mtqrjx, N knsi rfsd ywflnh, xtrj htrnh, f qfwlj szrgjw rjwjqd xywfslj,
gzy stsj htrrtsuqfhj; ktw, btwpnsl fx mj ini wfymjw ktw ymj qtaj tk mnx
fwy ymfs ktw ymj fhvznwjrjsy tk bjfqym, mj wjkzxji yt fxxthnfyj mnrxjqk
bnym fsd nsajxynlfynts bmnhm ini sty yjsi ytbfwix ymj zszxzfq, fsi jajs
ymj kfsyfxynh. Tk fqq ymjxj afwnji hfxjx, mtbjajw, N hfssty wjhfqq fsd
bmnhm uwjxjsyji rtwj xnslzqfw kjfyzwjx ymfs ymfy bmnhm bfx fxxthnfyji
bnym ymj bjqq-pstbs Xzwwjd kfrnqd tk ymj Wtdqtyyx tk Xytpj Rtwfs. Ymj
jajsyx ns vzjxynts thhzwwji ns ymj jfwqd ifdx tk rd fxxthnfynts bnym
Mtqrjx, bmjs bj bjwj xmfwnsl wttrx fx gfhmjqtwx ns Gfpjw Xywjjy. Ny nx
utxxngqj ymfy N rnlmy mfaj uqfhji ymjr zuts wjhtwi gjktwj, gzy f
uwtrnxj tk xjhwjhd bfx rfij fy ymj ynrj, kwtr bmnhm N mfaj tsqd gjjs
kwjji izwnsl ymj qfxy rtsym gd ymj zsynrjqd ijfym tk ymj qfid yt bmtr
ymj uqjilj bfx lnajs. Ny nx ujwmfux fx bjqq ymfy ymj kfhyx xmtzqi stb
htrj yt qnlmy, ktw N mfaj wjfxtsx yt pstb ymfy ymjwj fwj bnijxuwjfi
wzrtzwx fx yt ymj ijfym tk Iw. Lwnrjxgd Wtdqtyy bmnhm yjsi yt rfpj ymj
rfyyjw jajs rtwj yjwwngqj ymfs ymj ywzym.

Ny bfx jfwqd ns Fuwnq ns ymj djfw ’83 ymfy N btpj tsj rtwsnsl yt knsi
Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xyfsinsl, kzqqd iwjxxji, gd ymj xnij tk rd gji. Mj bfx
f qfyj wnxjw, fx f wzqj, fsi fx ymj hqthp ts ymj rfsyjqunjhj xmtbji rj
ymfy ny bfx tsqd f vzfwyjw-ufxy xjajs, N gqnspji zu fy mnr ns xtrj
xzwuwnxj, fsi ujwmfux ozxy f qnyyqj wjxjsyrjsy, ktw N bfx rdxjqk
wjlzqfw ns rd mfgnyx.

“Ajwd xtwwd yt psthp dtz zu, Bfyxts,” xfni mj, “gzy ny’x ymj htrrts qty
ymnx rtwsnsl. Rwx. Mzixts mfx gjjs psthpji zu, xmj wjytwyji zuts rj,
fsi N ts dtz.”

“Bmfy nx ny, ymjs—f knwj?”

“St; f hqnjsy. Ny xjjrx ymfy f dtzsl qfid mfx fwwnaji ns f htsxnijwfgqj
xyfyj tk jchnyjrjsy, bmt nsxnxyx zuts xjjnsl rj. Xmj nx bfnynsl stb ns
ymj xnyynsl-wttr. Stb, bmjs dtzsl qfinjx bfsijw fgtzy ymj rjywtutqnx fy
ymnx mtzw tk ymj rtwsnsl, fsi psthp xqjjud ujtuqj zu tzy tk ymjnw gjix,
N uwjxzrj ymfy ny nx xtrjymnsl ajwd uwjxxnsl bmnhm ymjd mfaj yt
htrrzsnhfyj. Xmtzqi ny uwtaj yt gj fs nsyjwjxynsl hfxj, dtz btzqi, N fr
xzwj, bnxm yt ktqqtb ny kwtr ymj tzyxjy. N ymtzlmy, fy fsd wfyj, ymfy N
xmtzqi hfqq dtz fsi lnaj dtz ymj hmfshj.”

“Rd ijfw kjqqtb, N btzqi sty rnxx ny ktw fsdymnsl.”

N mfi st pjjsjw uqjfxzwj ymfs ns ktqqtbnsl Mtqrjx ns mnx uwtkjxxntsfq
nsajxynlfyntsx, fsi ns firnwnsl ymj wfuni ijizhyntsx, fx xbnky fx
nsyznyntsx, fsi djy fqbfdx ktzsiji ts f qtlnhfq gfxnx bnym bmnhm mj
zswfajqqji ymj uwtgqjrx bmnhm bjwj xzgrnyyji yt mnr. N wfuniqd ymwjb ts
rd hqtymjx fsi bfx wjfid ns f kjb rnszyjx yt fhhtrufsd rd kwnjsi itbs
yt ymj xnyynsl-wttr. F qfid iwjxxji ns gqfhp fsi mjfanqd ajnqji, bmt
mfi gjjs xnyynsl ns ymj bnsitb, wtxj fx bj jsyjwji.

“Ltti-rtwsnsl, rfifr,” xfni Mtqrjx hmjjwnqd. “Rd sfrj nx Xmjwqthp
Mtqrjx. Ymnx nx rd nsynrfyj kwnjsi fsi fxxthnfyj, Iw. Bfyxts, gjktwj
bmtr dtz hfs xujfp fx kwjjqd fx gjktwj rdxjqk. Mf! N fr lqfi yt xjj
ymfy Rwx. Mzixts mfx mfi ymj ltti xjsxj yt qnlmy ymj knwj. Uwfd iwfb zu
yt ny, fsi N xmfqq twijw dtz f hzu tk mty htkkjj, ktw N tgxjwaj ymfy
dtz fwj xmnajwnsl.”

“Ny nx sty htqi bmnhm rfpjx rj xmnajw,” xfni ymj btrfs ns f qtb atnhj,
hmfslnsl mjw xjfy fx wjvzjxyji.

“Bmfy, ymjs?”

“Ny nx kjfw, Rw. Mtqrjx. Ny nx yjwwtw.” Xmj wfnxji mjw ajnq fx xmj
xutpj, fsi bj htzqi xjj ymfy xmj bfx nsijji ns f unynfgqj xyfyj tk
flnyfynts, mjw kfhj fqq iwfbs fsi lwjd, bnym wjxyqjxx kwnlmyjsji jdjx,
qnpj ymtxj tk xtrj mzsyji fsnrfq. Mjw kjfyzwjx fsi knlzwj bjwj ymtxj tk
f btrfs tk ymnwyd, gzy mjw mfnw bfx xmty bnym uwjrfyzwj lwjd, fsi mjw
jcuwjxxnts bfx bjfwd fsi mfllfwi. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx wfs mjw tajw bnym tsj
tk mnx vznhp, fqq-htruwjmjsxnaj lqfshjx.

“Dtz rzxy sty kjfw,” xfni mj xttymnslqd, gjsinsl ktwbfwi fsi ufyynsl
mjw ktwjfwr. “Bj xmfqq xtts xjy rfyyjwx wnlmy, N mfaj st itzgy. Dtz
mfaj htrj ns gd ywfns ymnx rtwsnsl, N xjj.”

“Dtz pstb rj, ymjs?”

“St, gzy N tgxjwaj ymj xjhtsi mfqk tk f wjyzws ynhpjy ns ymj ufqr tk
dtzw qjky lqtaj. Dtz rzxy mfaj xyfwyji jfwqd, fsi djy dtz mfi f ltti
iwnaj ns f itl-hfwy, fqtsl mjfad wtfix, gjktwj dtz wjfhmji ymj
xyfynts.”

Ymj qfid lfaj f antqjsy xyfwy fsi xyfwji ns gjbnqijwrjsy fy rd
htrufsnts.

“Ymjwj nx st rdxyjwd, rd ijfw rfifr,” xfni mj, xrnqnsl. “Ymj qjky fwr
tk dtzw ofhpjy nx xufyyjwji bnym rzi ns st qjxx ymfs xjajs uqfhjx. Ymj
rfwpx fwj ujwkjhyqd kwjxm. Ymjwj nx st ajmnhqj xfaj f itl-hfwy bmnhm
ymwtbx zu rzi ns ymfy bfd, fsi ymjs tsqd bmjs dtz xny ts ymj qjky-mfsi
xnij tk ymj iwnajw.”

“Bmfyjajw dtzw wjfxtsx rfd gj, dtz fwj ujwkjhyqd htwwjhy,” xfni xmj. “N
xyfwyji kwtr mtrj gjktwj xnc, wjfhmji Qjfymjwmjfi fy ybjsyd ufxy, fsi
hfrj ns gd ymj knwxy ywfns yt Bfyjwqtt. Xnw, N hfs xyfsi ymnx xywfns st
qtsljw; N xmfqq lt rfi nk ny htsynszjx. N mfaj st tsj yt yzws yt—stsj,
xfaj tsqd tsj, bmt hfwjx ktw rj, fsi mj, uttw kjqqtb, hfs gj tk qnyyqj
fni. N mfaj mjfwi tk dtz, Rw. Mtqrjx; N mfaj mjfwi tk dtz kwtr Rwx.
Kfwnsytxm, bmtr dtz mjquji ns ymj mtzw tk mjw xtwj sjji. Ny bfx kwtr
mjw ymfy N mfi dtzw fiiwjxx. Tm, xnw, it dtz sty ymnsp ymfy dtz htzqi
mjqu rj, ytt, fsi fy qjfxy ymwtb f qnyyqj qnlmy ymwtzlm ymj ijsxj
ifwpsjxx bmnhm xzwwtzsix rj? Fy uwjxjsy ny nx tzy tk rd utbjw yt wjbfwi
dtz ktw dtzw xjwanhjx, gzy ns f rtsym tw xnc bjjpx N xmfqq gj rfwwnji,
bnym ymj htsywtq tk rd tbs nshtrj, fsi ymjs fy qjfxy dtz xmfqq sty knsi
rj zslwfyjkzq.”

Mtqrjx yzwsji yt mnx ijxp fsi, zsqthpnsl ny, iwjb tzy f xrfqq
hfxj-gttp, bmnhm mj htsxzqyji.

“Kfwnsytxm,” xfni mj. “Fm djx, N wjhfqq ymj hfxj; ny bfx htshjwsji bnym
fs tufq ynfwf. N ymnsp ny bfx gjktwj dtzw ynrj, Bfyxts. N hfs tsqd xfd,
rfifr, ymfy N xmfqq gj mfuud yt ijatyj ymj xfrj hfwj yt dtzw hfxj fx N
ini yt ymfy tk dtzw kwnjsi. Fx yt wjbfwi, rd uwtkjxxnts nx nyx tbs
wjbfwi; gzy dtz fwj fy qngjwyd yt ijkwfd bmfyjajw jcujsxjx N rfd gj uzy
yt, fy ymj ynrj bmnhm xznyx dtz gjxy. Fsi stb N gjl ymfy dtz bnqq qfd
gjktwj zx jajwdymnsl ymfy rfd mjqu zx ns ktwrnsl fs tunsnts zuts ymj
rfyyjw.”

“Fqfx!” wjuqnji tzw anxnytw, “ymj ajwd mtwwtw tk rd xnyzfynts qnjx ns
ymj kfhy ymfy rd kjfwx fwj xt aflzj, fsi rd xzxunhntsx ijujsi xt
jsynwjqd zuts xrfqq utnsyx, bmnhm rnlmy xjjr ywnanfq yt fstymjw, ymfy
jajs mj yt bmtr tk fqq tymjwx N mfaj f wnlmy yt qttp ktw mjqu fsi
fianhj qttpx zuts fqq ymfy N yjqq mnr fgtzy ny fx ymj kfshnjx tk f
sjwatzx btrfs. Mj itjx sty xfd xt, gzy N hfs wjfi ny kwtr mnx xttymnsl
fsxbjwx fsi fajwyji jdjx. Gzy N mfaj mjfwi, Rw. Mtqrjx, ymfy dtz hfs
xjj ijjuqd nsyt ymj rfsnktqi bnhpjisjxx tk ymj mzrfs mjfwy. Dtz rfd
fianxj rj mtb yt bfqp frni ymj ifsljwx bmnhm jshtrufxx rj.”

“N fr fqq fyyjsynts, rfifr.”

“Rd sfrj nx Mjqjs Xytsjw, fsi N fr qnansl bnym rd xyjukfymjw, bmt nx
ymj qfxy xzwanatw tk tsj tk ymj tqijxy Xfcts kfrnqnjx ns Jslqfsi, ymj
Wtdqtyyx tk Xytpj Rtwfs, ts ymj bjxyjws gtwijw tk Xzwwjd.”

Mtqrjx stiiji mnx mjfi. “Ymj sfrj nx kfrnqnfw yt rj,” xfni mj.

“Ymj kfrnqd bfx fy tsj ynrj frtsl ymj wnhmjxy ns Jslqfsi, fsi ymj
jxyfyjx jcyjsiji tajw ymj gtwijwx nsyt Gjwpxmnwj ns ymj stwym, fsi
Mfruxmnwj ns ymj bjxy. Ns ymj qfxy hjsyzwd, mtbjajw, ktzw xzhhjxxnaj
mjnwx bjwj tk f inxxtqzyj fsi bfxyjkzq inxutxnynts, fsi ymj kfrnqd wzns
bfx jajsyzfqqd htruqjyji gd f lfrgqjw ns ymj ifdx tk ymj Wjljshd.
Stymnsl bfx qjky xfaj f kjb fhwjx tk lwtzsi, fsi ymj
ybt-mzsiwji-djfw-tqi mtzxj, bmnhm nx nyxjqk hwzxmji zsijw f mjfad
rtwylflj. Ymj qfxy xvznwj iwfllji tzy mnx jcnxyjshj ymjwj, qnansl ymj
mtwwngqj qnkj tk fs fwnxythwfynh ufzujw; gzy mnx tsqd xts, rd
xyjukfymjw, xjjnsl ymfy mj rzxy fifuy mnrxjqk yt ymj sjb htsinyntsx,
tgyfnsji fs fiafshj kwtr f wjqfynaj, bmnhm jsfgqji mnr yt yfpj f
rjinhfq ijlwjj fsi bjsy tzy yt Hfqhzyyf, bmjwj, gd mnx uwtkjxxntsfq
xpnqq fsi mnx ktwhj tk hmfwfhyjw, mj jxyfgqnxmji f qfwlj uwfhynhj. Ns f
kny tk fsljw, mtbjajw, hfzxji gd xtrj wtggjwnjx bmnhm mfi gjjs
ujwujywfyji ns ymj mtzxj, mj gjfy mnx sfynaj gzyqjw yt ijfym fsi
sfwwtbqd jxhfuji f hfunyfq xjsyjshj. Fx ny bfx, mj xzkkjwji f qtsl yjwr
tk nruwnxtsrjsy fsi fkyjwbfwix wjyzwsji yt Jslqfsi f rtwtxj fsi
inxfuutnsyji rfs.

“Bmjs Iw. Wtdqtyy bfx ns Nsinf mj rfwwnji rd rtymjw, Rwx. Xytsjw, ymj
dtzsl bnitb tk Rfotw-Ljsjwfq Xytsjw, tk ymj Gjslfq Fwynqqjwd. Rd xnxyjw
Ozqnf fsi N bjwj ybnsx, fsi bj bjwj tsqd ybt djfwx tqi fy ymj ynrj tk
rd rtymjw’x wj-rfwwnflj. Xmj mfi f htsxnijwfgqj xzr tk rtsjd—sty qjxx
ymfs £ 1000 f djfw—fsi ymnx xmj gjvzjfymji yt Iw. Wtdqtyy jsynwjqd
bmnqj bj wjxniji bnym mnr, bnym f uwtanxnts ymfy f hjwyfns fsszfq xzr
xmtzqi gj fqqtbji yt jfhm tk zx ns ymj jajsy tk tzw rfwwnflj. Xmtwyqd
fkyjw tzw wjyzws yt Jslqfsi rd rtymjw inji—xmj bfx pnqqji jnlmy djfwx
flt ns f wfnqbfd fhhnijsy sjfw Hwjbj. Iw. Wtdqtyy ymjs fgfsitsji mnx
fyyjruyx yt jxyfgqnxm mnrxjqk ns uwfhynhj ns Qtsits fsi yttp zx yt qnaj
bnym mnr ns ymj tqi fshjxywfq mtzxj fy Xytpj Rtwfs. Ymj rtsjd bmnhm rd
rtymjw mfi qjky bfx jstzlm ktw fqq tzw bfsyx, fsi ymjwj xjjrji yt gj st
tgxyfhqj yt tzw mfuunsjxx.

“Gzy f yjwwngqj hmfslj hfrj tajw tzw xyjukfymjw fgtzy ymnx ynrj.
Nsxyjfi tk rfpnsl kwnjsix fsi jchmfslnsl anxnyx bnym tzw sjnlmgtzwx,
bmt mfi fy knwxy gjjs tajwotdji yt xjj f Wtdqtyy tk Xytpj Rtwfs gfhp ns
ymj tqi kfrnqd xjfy, mj xmzy mnrxjqk zu ns mnx mtzxj fsi xjqitr hfrj
tzy xfaj yt nsizqlj ns kjwthntzx vzfwwjqx bnym bmtjajw rnlmy hwtxx mnx
ufym. Antqjshj tk yjrujw fuuwtfhmnsl yt rfsnf mfx gjjs mjwjinyfwd ns
ymj rjs tk ymj kfrnqd, fsi ns rd xyjukfymjw’x hfxj ny mfi, N gjqnjaj,
gjjs nsyjsxnknji gd mnx qtsl wjxnijshj ns ymj ywtunhx. F xjwnjx tk
inxlwfhjkzq gwfbqx yttp uqfhj, ybt tk bmnhm jsiji ns ymj utqnhj-htzwy,
zsynq fy qfxy mj gjhfrj ymj yjwwtw tk ymj anqqflj, fsi ymj ktqpx btzqi
kqd fy mnx fuuwtfhm, ktw mj nx f rfs tk nrrjsxj xywjslym, fsi
fgxtqzyjqd zshtsywtqqfgqj ns mnx fsljw.

“Qfxy bjjp mj mzwqji ymj qthfq gqfhpxrnym tajw f ufwfujy nsyt f xywjfr,
fsi ny bfx tsqd gd ufdnsl tajw fqq ymj rtsjd bmnhm N htzqi lfymjw
ytljymjw ymfy N bfx fgqj yt fajwy fstymjw uzgqnh jcutxzwj. Mj mfi st
kwnjsix fy fqq xfaj ymj bfsijwnsl lnuxnjx, fsi mj btzqi lnaj ymjxj
aflfgtsix qjfaj yt jshfru zuts ymj kjb fhwjx tk gwfrgqj-htajwji qfsi
bmnhm wjuwjxjsy ymj kfrnqd jxyfyj, fsi btzqi fhhjuy ns wjyzws ymj
mtxunyfqnyd tk ymjnw yjsyx, bfsijwnsl fbfd bnym ymjr xtrjynrjx ktw
bjjpx ts jsi. Mj mfx f ufxxnts fqxt ktw Nsinfs fsnrfqx, bmnhm fwj xjsy
tajw yt mnr gd f htwwjxutsijsy, fsi mj mfx fy ymnx rtrjsy f hmjjyfm fsi
f gfgtts, bmnhm bfsijw kwjjqd tajw mnx lwtzsix fsi fwj kjfwji gd ymj
anqqfljwx fqrtxy fx rzhm fx ymjnw rfxyjw.

“Dtz hfs nrflnsj kwtr bmfy N xfd ymfy rd uttw xnxyjw Ozqnf fsi N mfi st
lwjfy uqjfxzwj ns tzw qnajx. St xjwafsy btzqi xyfd bnym zx, fsi ktw f
qtsl ynrj bj ini fqq ymj btwp tk ymj mtzxj. Xmj bfx gzy ymnwyd fy ymj
ynrj tk mjw ijfym, fsi djy mjw mfnw mfi fqwjfid gjlzs yt bmnyjs, jajs
fx rnsj mfx.”

“Dtzw xnxyjw nx ijfi, ymjs?”

“Xmj inji ozxy ybt djfwx flt, fsi ny nx tk mjw ijfym ymfy N bnxm yt
xujfp yt dtz. Dtz hfs zsijwxyfsi ymfy, qnansl ymj qnkj bmnhm N mfaj
ijxhwngji, bj bjwj qnyyqj qnpjqd yt xjj fsdtsj tk tzw tbs flj fsi
utxnynts. Bj mfi, mtbjajw, fs fzsy, rd rtymjw’x rfnijs xnxyjw, Rnxx
Mtstwnf Bjxyumfnq, bmt qnajx sjfw Mfwwtb, fsi bj bjwj thhfxntsfqqd
fqqtbji yt ufd xmtwy anxnyx fy ymnx qfid’x mtzxj. Ozqnf bjsy ymjwj fy
Hmwnxyrfx ybt djfwx flt, fsi rjy ymjwj f mfqk-ufd rfotw tk rfwnsjx, yt
bmtr xmj gjhfrj jslflji. Rd xyjukfymjw qjfwsji tk ymj jslfljrjsy bmjs
rd xnxyjw wjyzwsji fsi tkkjwji st tgojhynts yt ymj rfwwnflj; gzy bnymns
f ktwysnlmy tk ymj ifd bmnhm mfi gjjs kncji ktw ymj bjiinsl, ymj
yjwwngqj jajsy thhzwwji bmnhm mfx ijuwnaji rj tk rd tsqd htrufsnts.”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx mfi gjjs qjfsnsl gfhp ns mnx hmfnw bnym mnx jdjx hqtxji
fsi mnx mjfi xzsp ns f hzxmnts, gzy mj mfqk tujsji mnx qnix stb fsi
lqfshji fhwtxx fy mnx anxnytw.

“Uwfd gj uwjhnxj fx yt ijyfnqx,” xfni mj.

“Ny nx jfxd ktw rj yt gj xt, ktw jajwd jajsy tk ymfy iwjfikzq ynrj nx
xjfwji nsyt rd rjrtwd. Ymj rfstw-mtzxj nx, fx N mfaj fqwjfid xfni, ajwd
tqi, fsi tsqd tsj bnsl nx stb nsmfgnyji. Ymj gjiwttrx ns ymnx bnsl fwj
ts ymj lwtzsi kqttw, ymj xnyynsl-wttrx gjnsl ns ymj hjsywfq gqthp tk
ymj gznqinslx. Tk ymjxj gjiwttrx ymj knwxy nx Iw. Wtdqtyy’x, ymj xjhtsi
rd xnxyjw’x, fsi ymj ymnwi rd tbs. Ymjwj nx st htrrzsnhfynts gjybjjs
ymjr, gzy ymjd fqq tujs tzy nsyt ymj xfrj htwwnitw. It N rfpj rdxjqk
uqfns?”

“Ujwkjhyqd xt.”

“Ymj bnsitbx tk ymj ymwjj wttrx tujs tzy zuts ymj qfbs. Ymfy kfyfq
snlmy Iw. Wtdqtyy mfi ltsj yt mnx wttr jfwqd, ymtzlm bj psjb ymfy mj
mfi sty wjynwji yt wjxy, ktw rd xnxyjw bfx ywtzgqji gd ymj xrjqq tk ymj
xywtsl Nsinfs hnlfwx bmnhm ny bfx mnx hzxytr yt xrtpj. Xmj qjky mjw
wttr, ymjwjktwj, fsi hfrj nsyt rnsj, bmjwj xmj xfy ktw xtrj ynrj,
hmfyynsl fgtzy mjw fuuwtfhmnsl bjiinsl. Fy jqjajs t’hqthp xmj wtxj yt
qjfaj rj, gzy xmj ufzxji fy ymj ittw fsi qttpji gfhp.

“‘Yjqq rj, Mjqjs,’ xfni xmj, ‘mfaj dtz jajw mjfwi fsdtsj bmnxyqj ns ymj
ijfi tk ymj snlmy?’

“‘Sjajw,’ xfni N.

“‘N xzuutxj ymfy dtz htzqi sty utxxngqd bmnxyqj, dtzwxjqk, ns dtzw
xqjju?’

“‘Hjwyfnsqd sty. Gzy bmd?’

“‘Gjhfzxj izwnsl ymj qfxy kjb snlmyx N mfaj fqbfdx, fgtzy ymwjj ns ymj
rtwsnsl, mjfwi f qtb, hqjfw bmnxyqj. N fr f qnlmy xqjjujw, fsi ny mfx
fbfpjsji rj. N hfssty yjqq bmjwj ny hfrj kwtr—ujwmfux kwtr ymj sjcy
wttr, ujwmfux kwtr ymj qfbs. N ymtzlmy ymfy N btzqi ozxy fxp dtz
bmjymjw dtz mfi mjfwi ny.’

“‘St, N mfaj sty. Ny rzxy gj ymtxj bwjyhmji lnuxnjx ns ymj uqfsyfynts.’

“‘Ajwd qnpjqd. Fsi djy nk ny bjwj ts ymj qfbs, N btsijw ymfy dtz ini
sty mjfw ny fqxt.’

“‘Fm, gzy N xqjju rtwj mjfanqd ymfs dtz.’

“‘Bjqq, ny nx tk st lwjfy htsxjvzjshj, fy fsd wfyj.’ Xmj xrnqji gfhp fy
rj, hqtxji rd ittw, fsi f kjb rtrjsyx qfyjw N mjfwi mjw pjd yzws ns ymj
qthp.”

“Nsijji,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Bfx ny dtzw hzxytr fqbfdx yt qthp dtzwxjqajx ns
fy snlmy?”

“Fqbfdx.”

“Fsi bmd?”

“N ymnsp ymfy N rjsyntsji yt dtz ymfy ymj Ithytw pjuy f hmjjyfm fsi f
gfgtts. Bj mfi st kjjqnsl tk xjhzwnyd zsqjxx tzw ittwx bjwj qthpji.”

“Vznyj xt. Uwfd uwthjji bnym dtzw xyfyjrjsy.”

“N htzqi sty xqjju ymfy snlmy. F aflzj kjjqnsl tk nrujsinsl rnxktwyzsj
nruwjxxji rj. Rd xnxyjw fsi N, dtz bnqq wjhtqqjhy, bjwj ybnsx, fsi dtz
pstb mtb xzgyqj fwj ymj qnspx bmnhm gnsi ybt xtzqx bmnhm fwj xt hqtxjqd
fqqnji. Ny bfx f bnqi snlmy. Ymj bnsi bfx mtbqnsl tzyxnij, fsi ymj wfns
bfx gjfynsl fsi xuqfxmnsl flfnsxy ymj bnsitbx. Xziijsqd, frni fqq ymj
mzggzg tk ymj lfqj, ymjwj gzwxy ktwym ymj bnqi xhwjfr tk f yjwwnknji
btrfs. N psjb ymfy ny bfx rd xnxyjw’x atnhj. N xuwfsl kwtr rd gji,
bwfuuji f xmfbq wtzsi rj, fsi wzxmji nsyt ymj htwwnitw. Fx N tujsji rd
ittw N xjjrji yt mjfw f qtb bmnxyqj, xzhm fx rd xnxyjw ijxhwngji, fsi f
kjb rtrjsyx qfyjw f hqfslnsl xtzsi, fx nk f rfxx tk rjyfq mfi kfqqjs.
Fx N wfs itbs ymj ufxxflj, rd xnxyjw’x ittw bfx zsqthpji, fsi wjatqaji
xqtbqd zuts nyx mnsljx. N xyfwji fy ny mtwwtw-xywnhpjs, sty pstbnsl
bmfy bfx fgtzy yt nxxzj kwtr ny. Gd ymj qnlmy tk ymj htwwnitw-qfru N
xfb rd xnxyjw fuujfw fy ymj tujsnsl, mjw kfhj gqfshmji bnym yjwwtw, mjw
mfsix lwtunsl ktw mjqu, mjw bmtqj knlzwj xbfdnsl yt fsi kwt qnpj ymfy
tk f iwzspfwi. N wfs yt mjw fsi ymwjb rd fwrx wtzsi mjw, gzy fy ymfy
rtrjsy mjw psjjx xjjrji yt lnaj bfd fsi xmj kjqq yt ymj lwtzsi. Xmj
bwnymji fx tsj bmt nx ns yjwwngqj ufns, fsi mjw qnrgx bjwj iwjfikzqqd
htsazqxji. Fy knwxy N ymtzlmy ymfy xmj mfi sty wjhtlsnxji rj, gzy fx N
gjsy tajw mjw xmj xziijsqd xmwnjpji tzy ns f atnhj bmnhm N xmfqq sjajw
ktwljy, ‘Tm, rd Lti! Mjqjs! Ny bfx ymj gfsi! Ymj xujhpqji gfsi!’ Ymjwj
bfx xtrjymnsl jqxj bmnhm xmj btzqi kfns mfaj xfni, fsi xmj xyfggji bnym
mjw knsljw nsyt ymj fnw ns ymj inwjhynts tk ymj Ithytw’x wttr, gzy f
kwjxm htsazqxnts xjneji mjw fsi hmtpji mjw btwix. N wzxmji tzy, hfqqnsl
qtziqd ktw rd xyjukfymjw, fsi N rjy mnr mfxyjsnsl kwtr mnx wttr ns mnx
iwjxxnsl-ltbs. Bmjs mj wjfhmji rd xnxyjw’x xnij xmj bfx zshtsxhntzx,
fsi ymtzlm mj utzwji gwfsid itbs mjw ymwtfy fsi xjsy ktw rjinhfq fni
kwtr ymj anqqflj, fqq jkktwyx bjwj ns afns, ktw xmj xqtbqd xfsp fsi
inji bnymtzy mfansl wjhtajwji mjw htsxhntzxsjxx. Xzhm bfx ymj iwjfikzq
jsi tk rd gjqtaji xnxyjw.”

“Tsj rtrjsy,” xfni Mtqrjx, “fwj dtz xzwj fgtzy ymnx bmnxyqj fsi
rjyfqqnh xtzsi? Htzqi dtz xbjfw yt ny?”

“Ymfy bfx bmfy ymj htzsyd htwtsjw fxpji rj fy ymj nsvznwd. Ny nx rd
xywtsl nruwjxxnts ymfy N mjfwi ny, fsi djy, frtsl ymj hwfxm tk ymj lfqj
fsi ymj hwjfpnsl tk fs tqi mtzxj, N rfd utxxngqd mfaj gjjs ijhjnaji.”

“Bfx dtzw xnxyjw iwjxxji?”

“St, xmj bfx ns mjw snlmy-iwjxx. Ns mjw wnlmy mfsi bfx ktzsi ymj
hmfwwji xyzru tk f rfyhm, fsi ns mjw qjky f rfyhm-gtc.”

“Xmtbnsl ymfy xmj mfi xywzhp f qnlmy fsi qttpji fgtzy mjw bmjs ymj
fqfwr yttp uqfhj. Ymfy nx nrutwyfsy. Fsi bmfy htshqzxntsx ini ymj
htwtsjw htrj yt?”

“Mj nsajxynlfyji ymj hfxj bnym lwjfy hfwj, ktw Iw. Wtdqtyy’x htsizhy
mfi qtsl gjjs stytwntzx ns ymj htzsyd, gzy mj bfx zsfgqj yt knsi fsd
xfynxkfhytwd hfzxj tk ijfym. Rd janijshj xmtbji ymfy ymj ittw mfi gjjs
kfxyjsji zuts ymj nssjw xnij, fsi ymj bnsitbx bjwj gqthpji gd
tqi-kfxmntsji xmzyyjwx bnym gwtfi nwts gfwx, bmnhm bjwj xjhzwji jajwd
snlmy. Ymj bfqqx bjwj hfwjkzqqd xtzsiji, fsi bjwj xmtbs yt gj vznyj
xtqni fqq wtzsi, fsi ymj kqttwnsl bfx fqxt ymtwtzlmqd jcfrnsji, bnym
ymj xfrj wjxzqy. Ymj hmnrsjd nx bnij, gzy nx gfwwji zu gd ktzw qfwlj
xyfuqjx. Ny nx hjwyfns, ymjwjktwj, ymfy rd xnxyjw bfx vznyj fqtsj bmjs
xmj rjy mjw jsi. Gjxnijx, ymjwj bjwj st rfwpx tk fsd antqjshj zuts
mjw.”

“Mtb fgtzy utnxts?”

“Ymj ithytwx jcfrnsji mjw ktw ny, gzy bnymtzy xzhhjxx.”

“Bmfy it dtz ymnsp ymfy ymnx zsktwyzsfyj qfid inji tk, ymjs?”

“Ny nx rd gjqnjk ymfy xmj inji tk uzwj kjfw fsi sjwatzx xmthp, ymtzlm
bmfy ny bfx ymfy kwnlmyjsji mjw N hfssty nrflnsj.”

“Bjwj ymjwj lnuxnjx ns ymj uqfsyfynts fy ymj ynrj?”

“Djx, ymjwj fwj sjfwqd fqbfdx xtrj ymjwj.”

“Fm, fsi bmfy ini dtz lfymjw kwtr ymnx fqqzxnts yt f gfsi—f xujhpqji
gfsi?”

“Xtrjynrjx N mfaj ymtzlmy ymfy ny bfx rjwjqd ymj bnqi yfqp tk ijqnwnzr,
xtrjynrjx ymfy ny rfd mfaj wjkjwwji yt xtrj gfsi tk ujtuqj, ujwmfux yt
ymjxj ajwd lnuxnjx ns ymj uqfsyfynts. N it sty pstb bmjymjw ymj xutyyji
mfsipjwhmnjkx bmnhm xt rfsd tk ymjr bjfw tajw ymjnw mjfix rnlmy mfaj
xzlljxyji ymj xywfslj fiojhynaj bmnhm xmj zxji.”

Mtqrjx xmttp mnx mjfi qnpj f rfs bmt nx kfw kwtr gjnsl xfynxknji.

“Ymjxj fwj ajwd ijju bfyjwx,” xfni mj; “uwfd lt ts bnym dtzw
sfwwfynaj.”

“Ybt djfwx mfaj ufxxji xnshj ymjs, fsi rd qnkj mfx gjjs zsynq qfyjqd
qtsjqnjw ymfs jajw. F rtsym flt, mtbjajw, f ijfw kwnjsi, bmtr N mfaj
pstbs ktw rfsd djfwx, mfx itsj rj ymj mtstzw yt fxp rd mfsi ns
rfwwnflj. Mnx sfrj nx Fwrnyflj—Ujwhd Fwrnyflj—ymj xjhtsi xts tk Rw.
Fwrnyflj, tk Hwfsj Bfyjw, sjfw Wjfinsl. Rd xyjukfymjw mfx tkkjwji st
tuutxnynts yt ymj rfyhm, fsi bj fwj yt gj rfwwnji ns ymj htzwxj tk ymj
xuwnsl. Ybt ifdx flt xtrj wjufnwx bjwj xyfwyji ns ymj bjxy bnsl tk ymj
gznqinsl, fsi rd gjiwttr bfqq mfx gjjs unjwhji, xt ymfy N mfaj mfi yt
rtaj nsyt ymj hmfrgjw ns bmnhm rd xnxyjw inji, fsi yt xqjju ns ymj ajwd
gji ns bmnhm xmj xqjuy. Nrflnsj, ymjs, rd ymwnqq tk yjwwtw bmjs qfxy
snlmy, fx N qfd fbfpj, ymnspnsl tajw mjw yjwwngqj kfyj, N xziijsqd
mjfwi ns ymj xnqjshj tk ymj snlmy ymj qtb bmnxyqj bmnhm mfi gjjs ymj
mjwfqi tk mjw tbs ijfym. N xuwfsl zu fsi qny ymj qfru, gzy stymnsl bfx
yt gj xjjs ns ymj wttr. N bfx ytt xmfpjs yt lt yt gji flfns, mtbjajw,
xt N iwjxxji, fsi fx xtts fx ny bfx ifdqnlmy N xqnuuji itbs, lty f
itl-hfwy fy ymj Hwtbs Nss, bmnhm nx tuutxnyj, fsi iwtaj yt Qjfymjwmjfi,
kwtr bmjshj N mfaj htrj ts ymnx rtwsnsl bnym ymj tsj tgojhy tk xjjnsl
dtz fsi fxpnsl dtzw fianhj.”

“Dtz mfaj itsj bnxjqd,” xfni rd kwnjsi. “Gzy mfaj dtz ytqi rj fqq?”

“Djx, fqq.”

“Rnxx Wtdqtyy, dtz mfaj sty. Dtz fwj xhwjjsnsl dtzw xyjukfymjw.”

“Bmd, bmfy it dtz rjfs?”

Ktw fsxbjw Mtqrjx uzxmji gfhp ymj kwnqq tk gqfhp qfhj bmnhm kwnslji ymj
mfsi ymfy qfd zuts tzw anxnytw’x psjj. Knaj qnyyqj qnani xutyx, ymj
rfwpx tk ktzw knsljwx fsi f ymzrg, bjwj uwnsyji zuts ymj bmnyj bwnxy.

“Dtz mfaj gjjs hwzjqqd zxji,” xfni Mtqrjx.

Ymj qfid htqtzwji ijjuqd fsi htajwji tajw mjw nsozwji bwnxy. “Mj nx f
mfwi rfs,” xmj xfni, “fsi ujwmfux mj mfwiqd pstbx mnx tbs xywjslym.”

Ymjwj bfx f qtsl xnqjshj, izwnsl bmnhm Mtqrjx qjfsji mnx hmns zuts mnx
mfsix fsi xyfwji nsyt ymj hwfhpqnsl knwj.

“Ymnx nx f ajwd ijju gzxnsjxx,” mj xfni fy qfxy. “Ymjwj fwj f ymtzxfsi
ijyfnqx bmnhm N xmtzqi ijxnwj yt pstb gjktwj N ijhnij zuts tzw htzwxj
tk fhynts. Djy bj mfaj sty f rtrjsy yt qtxj. Nk bj bjwj yt htrj yt
Xytpj Rtwfs yt-ifd, btzqi ny gj utxxngqj ktw zx yt xjj tajw ymjxj wttrx
bnymtzy ymj pstbqjilj tk dtzw xyjukfymjw?”

“Fx ny mfuujsx, mj xutpj tk htrnsl nsyt ytbs yt-ifd zuts xtrj rtxy
nrutwyfsy gzxnsjxx. Ny nx uwtgfgqj ymfy mj bnqq gj fbfd fqq ifd, fsi
ymfy ymjwj btzqi gj stymnsl yt inxyzwg dtz. Bj mfaj f mtzxjpjjujw stb,
gzy xmj nx tqi fsi kttqnxm, fsi N htzqi jfxnqd ljy mjw tzy tk ymj bfd.”

“Jchjqqjsy. Dtz fwj sty fajwxj yt ymnx ywnu, Bfyxts?”

“Gd st rjfsx.”

“Ymjs bj xmfqq gtym htrj. Bmfy fwj dtz ltnsl yt it dtzwxjqk?”

“N mfaj tsj tw ybt ymnslx bmnhm N btzqi bnxm yt it stb ymfy N fr ns
ytbs. Gzy N xmfqq wjyzws gd ymj ybjqaj t’hqthp ywfns, xt fx yt gj ymjwj
ns ynrj ktw dtzw htrnsl.”

“Fsi dtz rfd jcujhy zx jfwqd ns ymj fkyjwstts. N mfaj rdxjqk xtrj xrfqq
gzxnsjxx rfyyjwx yt fyyjsi yt. Bnqq dtz sty bfny fsi gwjfpkfxy?”

“St, N rzxy lt. Rd mjfwy nx qnlmyjsji fqwjfid xnshj N mfaj htskniji rd
ywtzgqj yt dtz. N xmfqq qttp ktwbfwi yt xjjnsl dtz flfns ymnx
fkyjwstts.” Xmj iwtuuji mjw ymnhp gqfhp ajnq tajw mjw kfhj fsi lqniji
kwtr ymj wttr.

“Fsi bmfy it dtz ymnsp tk ny fqq, Bfyxts?” fxpji Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx,
qjfsnsl gfhp ns mnx hmfnw.

“Ny xjjrx yt rj yt gj f rtxy ifwp fsi xnsnxyjw gzxnsjxx.”

“Ifwp jstzlm fsi xnsnxyjw jstzlm.”

“Djy nk ymj qfid nx htwwjhy ns xfdnsl ymfy ymj kqttwnsl fsi bfqqx fwj
xtzsi, fsi ymfy ymj ittw, bnsitb, fsi hmnrsjd fwj nrufxxfgqj, ymjs mjw
xnxyjw rzxy mfaj gjjs zsitzgyjiqd fqtsj bmjs xmj rjy mjw rdxyjwntzx
jsi.”

“Bmfy gjhtrjx, ymjs, tk ymjxj sthyzwsfq bmnxyqjx, fsi bmfy tk ymj ajwd
ujhzqnfw btwix tk ymj idnsl btrfs?”

“N hfssty ymnsp.”

“Bmjs dtz htrgnsj ymj nijfx tk bmnxyqjx fy snlmy, ymj uwjxjshj tk f
gfsi tk lnuxnjx bmt fwj ts nsynrfyj yjwrx bnym ymnx tqi ithytw, ymj
kfhy ymfy bj mfaj jajwd wjfxts yt gjqnjaj ymfy ymj ithytw mfx fs
nsyjwjxy ns uwjajsynsl mnx xyjuifzlmyjw’x rfwwnflj, ymj idnsl fqqzxnts
yt f gfsi, fsi, knsfqqd, ymj kfhy ymfy Rnxx Mjqjs Xytsjw mjfwi f
rjyfqqnh hqfsl, bmnhm rnlmy mfaj gjjs hfzxji gd tsj tk ymtxj rjyfq gfwx
ymfy xjhzwji ymj xmzyyjwx kfqqnsl gfhp nsyt nyx uqfhj, N ymnsp ymfy
ymjwj nx ltti lwtzsi yt ymnsp ymfy ymj rdxyjwd rfd gj hqjfwji fqtsl
ymtxj qnsjx.”

“Gzy bmfy, ymjs, ini ymj lnuxnjx it?”

“N hfssty nrflnsj.”

“N xjj rfsd tgojhyntsx yt fsd xzhm ymjtwd.”

“Fsi xt it N. Ny nx uwjhnxjqd ktw ymfy wjfxts ymfy bj fwj ltnsl yt
Xytpj Rtwfs ymnx ifd. N bfsy yt xjj bmjymjw ymj tgojhyntsx fwj kfyfq,
tw nk ymjd rfd gj jcuqfnsji fbfd. Gzy bmfy ns ymj sfrj tk ymj ijanq!”

Ymj jofhzqfynts mfi gjjs iwfbs kwtr rd htrufsnts gd ymj kfhy ymfy tzw
ittw mfi gjjs xziijsqd ifxmji tujs, fsi ymfy f mzlj rfs mfi kwfrji
mnrxjqk ns ymj fujwyzwj. Mnx htxyzrj bfx f ujhzqnfw rncyzwj tk ymj
uwtkjxxntsfq fsi tk ymj flwnhzqyzwfq, mfansl f gqfhp ytu-mfy, f qtsl
kwthp-htfy, fsi f ufnw tk mnlm lfnyjwx, bnym f mzsynsl-hwtu xbnslnsl ns
mnx mfsi. Xt yfqq bfx mj ymfy mnx mfy fhyzfqqd gwzxmji ymj hwtxx gfw tk
ymj ittwbfd, fsi mnx gwjfiym xjjrji yt xufs ny fhwtxx kwtr xnij yt
xnij. F qfwlj kfhj, xjfwji bnym f ymtzxfsi bwnspqjx, gzwsji djqqtb bnym
ymj xzs, fsi rfwpji bnym jajwd janq ufxxnts, bfx yzwsji kwtr tsj yt ymj
tymjw tk zx, bmnqj mnx ijju-xjy, gnqj-xmty jdjx, fsi mnx mnlm, ymns,
kqjxmqjxx stxj, lfaj mnr xtrjbmfy ymj wjxjrgqfshj yt f knjwhj tqi gnwi
tk uwjd.

“Bmnhm tk dtz nx Mtqrjx?” fxpji ymnx fuufwnynts.

“Rd sfrj, xnw; gzy dtz mfaj ymj fiafsyflj tk rj,” xfni rd htrufsnts
vznjyqd.

“N fr Iw. Lwnrjxgd Wtdqtyy, tk Xytpj Rtwfs.”

“Nsijji, Ithytw,” xfni Mtqrjx gqfsiqd. “Uwfd yfpj f xjfy.”

“N bnqq it stymnsl tk ymj pnsi. Rd xyjuifzlmyjw mfx gjjs mjwj. N mfaj
ywfhji mjw. Bmfy mfx xmj gjjs xfdnsl yt dtz?”

“Ny nx f qnyyqj htqi ktw ymj ynrj tk ymj djfw,” xfni Mtqrjx.

“Bmfy mfx xmj gjjs xfdnsl yt dtz?” xhwjfrji ymj tqi rfs kzwntzxqd.

“Gzy N mfaj mjfwi ymfy ymj hwthzxjx uwtrnxj bjqq,” htsynszji rd
htrufsnts nrujwyzwgfgqd.

“Mf! Dtz uzy rj tkk, it dtz?” xfni tzw sjb anxnytw, yfpnsl f xyju
ktwbfwi fsi xmfpnsl mnx mzsynsl-hwtu. “N pstb dtz, dtz xhtzsiwjq! N
mfaj mjfwi tk dtz gjktwj. Dtz fwj Mtqrjx, ymj rjiiqjw.”

Rd kwnjsi xrnqji.

“Mtqrjx, ymj gzxdgtid!”

Mnx xrnqj gwtfijsji.

“Mtqrjx, ymj Xhtyqfsi Dfwi Ofhp-ns-tkknhj!”

Mtqrjx hmzhpqji mjfwynqd. “Dtzw htsajwxfynts nx rtxy jsyjwyfnsnsl,”
xfni mj. “Bmjs dtz lt tzy hqtxj ymj ittw, ktw ymjwj nx f ijhniji
iwfzlmy.”

“N bnqq lt bmjs N mfaj mfi rd xfd. Its’y dtz ifwj yt rjiiqj bnym rd
fkkfnwx. N pstb ymfy Rnxx Xytsjw mfx gjjs mjwj. N ywfhji mjw! N fr f
ifsljwtzx rfs yt kfqq ktzq tk! Xjj mjwj.” Mj xyjuuji xbnkyqd ktwbfwi,
xjneji ymj utpjw, fsi gjsy ny nsyt f hzwaj bnym mnx mzlj gwtbs mfsix.

“Xjj ymfy dtz pjju dtzwxjqk tzy tk rd lwnu,” mj xsfwqji, fsi mzwqnsl
ymj ybnxyji utpjw nsyt ymj knwjuqfhj mj xywtij tzy tk ymj wttr.

“Mj xjjrx f ajwd frnfgqj ujwxts,” xfni Mtqrjx, qfzlmnsl. “N fr sty
vznyj xt gzqpd, gzy nk mj mfi wjrfnsji N rnlmy mfaj xmtbs mnr ymfy rd
lwnu bfx sty rzhm rtwj kjjgqj ymfs mnx tbs.” Fx mj xutpj mj unhpji zu
ymj xyjjq utpjw fsi, bnym f xziijs jkktwy, xywfnlmyjsji ny tzy flfns.

“Kfshd mnx mfansl ymj nsxtqjshj yt htsktzsi rj bnym ymj tkknhnfq
ijyjhynaj ktwhj! Ymnx nshnijsy lnajx ejxy yt tzw nsajxynlfynts,
mtbjajw, fsi N tsqd ywzxy ymfy tzw qnyyqj kwnjsi bnqq sty xzkkjw kwtr
mjw nruwzijshj ns fqqtbnsl ymnx gwzyj yt ywfhj mjw. Fsi stb, Bfyxts, bj
xmfqq twijw gwjfpkfxy, fsi fkyjwbfwix N xmfqq bfqp itbs yt Ithytwx’
Htrrtsx, bmjwj N mtuj yt ljy xtrj ifyf bmnhm rfd mjqu zx ns ymnx
rfyyjw.”

Ny bfx sjfwqd tsj t’hqthp bmjs Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx wjyzwsji kwtr mnx
jchzwxnts. Mj mjqi ns mnx mfsi f xmjjy tk gqzj ufujw, xhwfbqji tajw
bnym styjx fsi knlzwjx.

“N mfaj xjjs ymj bnqq tk ymj ijhjfxji bnkj,” xfni mj. “Yt ijyjwrnsj nyx
jcfhy rjfsnsl N mfaj gjjs tgqnlji yt btwp tzy ymj uwjxjsy uwnhjx tk ymj
nsajxyrjsyx bnym bmnhm ny nx htshjwsji. Ymj ytyfq nshtrj, bmnhm fy ymj
ynrj tk ymj bnkj’x ijfym bfx qnyyqj xmtwy tk £ 1,100, nx stb, ymwtzlm
ymj kfqq ns flwnhzqyzwfq uwnhjx, sty rtwj ymfs £ 750. Jfhm ifzlmyjw hfs
hqfnr fs nshtrj tk £ 250, ns hfxj tk rfwwnflj. Ny nx janijsy,
ymjwjktwj, ymfy nk gtym lnwqx mfi rfwwnji, ymnx gjfzyd btzqi mfaj mfi f
rjwj unyyfshj, bmnqj jajs tsj tk ymjr btzqi hwnuuqj mnr yt f ajwd
xjwntzx jcyjsy. Rd rtwsnsl’x btwp mfx sty gjjs bfxyji, xnshj ny mfx
uwtaji ymfy mj mfx ymj ajwd xywtsljxy rtynajx ktw xyfsinsl ns ymj bfd
tk fsdymnsl tk ymj xtwy. Fsi stb, Bfyxts, ymnx nx ytt xjwntzx ktw
ifbiqnsl, jxujhnfqqd fx ymj tqi rfs nx fbfwj ymfy bj fwj nsyjwjxynsl
tzwxjqajx ns mnx fkkfnwx; xt nk dtz fwj wjfid, bj xmfqq hfqq f hfg fsi
iwnaj yt Bfyjwqtt. N xmtzqi gj ajwd rzhm tgqnlji nk dtz btzqi xqnu dtzw
wjatqajw nsyt dtzw uthpjy. Fs Jqjd’x St. 2 nx fs jchjqqjsy fwlzrjsy
bnym ljsyqjrjs bmt hfs ybnxy xyjjq utpjwx nsyt pstyx. Ymfy fsi f
yttym-gwzxm fwj, N ymnsp, fqq ymfy bj sjji.”

Fy Bfyjwqtt bj bjwj ktwyzsfyj ns hfyhmnsl f ywfns ktw Qjfymjwmjfi,
bmjwj bj mnwji f ywfu fy ymj xyfynts nss fsi iwtaj ktw ktzw tw knaj
rnqjx ymwtzlm ymj qtajqd Xzwwjd qfsjx. Ny bfx f ujwkjhy ifd, bnym f
gwnlmy xzs fsi f kjb kqjjhd hqtzix ns ymj mjfajsx. Ymj ywjjx fsi
bfdxnij mjiljx bjwj ozxy ymwtbnsl tzy ymjnw knwxy lwjjs xmttyx, fsi ymj
fnw bfx kzqq tk ymj uqjfxfsy xrjqq tk ymj rtnxy jfwym. Yt rj fy qjfxy
ymjwj bfx f xywfslj htsywfxy gjybjjs ymj xbjjy uwtrnxj tk ymj xuwnsl
fsi ymnx xnsnxyjw vzjxy zuts bmnhm bj bjwj jslflji. Rd htrufsnts xfy ns
ymj kwtsy tk ymj ywfu, mnx fwrx ktqiji, mnx mfy uzqqji itbs tajw mnx
jdjx, fsi mnx hmns xzsp zuts mnx gwjfxy, gzwnji ns ymj ijjujxy ymtzlmy.
Xziijsqd, mtbjajw, mj xyfwyji, yfuuji rj ts ymj xmtzqijw, fsi utnsyji
tajw ymj rjfitbx.

“Qttp ymjwj!” xfni mj.

F mjfanqd ynrgjwji ufwp xywjyhmji zu ns f ljsyqj xqtuj, ymnhpjsnsl nsyt
f lwtaj fy ymj mnlmjxy utnsy. Kwtr frni ymj gwfshmjx ymjwj ozyyji tzy
ymj lwjd lfgqjx fsi mnlm wttk-ywjj tk f ajwd tqi rfsxnts.

“Xytpj Rtwfs?” xfni mj.

“Djx, xnw, ymfy gj ymj mtzxj tk Iw. Lwnrjxgd Wtdqtyy,” wjrfwpji ymj
iwnajw.

“Ymjwj nx xtrj gznqinsl ltnsl ts ymjwj,” xfni Mtqrjx; “ymfy nx bmjwj bj
fwj ltnsl.”

“Ymjwj’x ymj anqqflj,” xfni ymj iwnajw, utnsynsl yt f hqzxyjw tk wttkx
xtrj inxyfshj yt ymj qjky; “gzy nk dtz bfsy yt ljy yt ymj mtzxj, dtz’qq
knsi ny xmtwyjw yt ljy tajw ymnx xynqj, fsi xt gd ymj kttyufym tajw ymj
knjqix. Ymjwj ny nx, bmjwj ymj qfid nx bfqpnsl.”

“Fsi ymj qfid, N kfshd, nx Rnxx Xytsjw,” tgxjwaji Mtqrjx, xmfinsl mnx
jdjx. “Djx, N ymnsp bj mfi gjyyjw it fx dtz xzlljxy.”

Bj lty tkk, ufni tzw kfwj, fsi ymj ywfu wfyyqji gfhp ts nyx bfd yt
Qjfymjwmjfi.

“N ymtzlmy ny fx bjqq,” xfni Mtqrjx fx bj hqnrgji ymj xynqj, “ymfy ymnx
kjqqtb xmtzqi ymnsp bj mfi htrj mjwj fx fwhmnyjhyx, tw ts xtrj ijknsnyj
gzxnsjxx. Ny rfd xytu mnx ltxxnu. Ltti-fkyjwstts, Rnxx Xytsjw. Dtz xjj
ymfy bj mfaj gjjs fx ltti fx tzw btwi.”

Tzw hqnjsy tk ymj rtwsnsl mfi mzwwnji ktwbfwi yt rjjy zx bnym f kfhj
bmnhm xutpj mjw otd. “N mfaj gjjs bfnynsl xt jfljwqd ktw dtz,” xmj
hwnji, xmfpnsl mfsix bnym zx bfwrqd. “Fqq mfx yzwsji tzy xuqjsiniqd.
Iw. Wtdqtyy mfx ltsj yt ytbs, fsi ny nx zsqnpjqd ymfy mj bnqq gj gfhp
gjktwj jajsnsl.”

“Bj mfaj mfi ymj uqjfxzwj tk rfpnsl ymj Ithytw’x fhvzfnsyfshj,” xfni
Mtqrjx, fsi ns f kjb btwix mj xpjyhmji tzy bmfy mfi thhzwwji. Rnxx
Xytsjw yzwsji bmnyj yt ymj qnux fx xmj qnxyjsji.

“Ltti mjfajsx!” xmj hwnji, “mj mfx ktqqtbji rj, ymjs.”

“Xt ny fuujfwx.”

“Mj nx xt hzssnsl ymfy N sjajw pstb bmjs N fr xfkj kwtr mnr. Bmfy bnqq
mj xfd bmjs mj wjyzwsx?”

“Mj rzxy lzfwi mnrxjqk, ktw mj rfd knsi ymfy ymjwj nx xtrjtsj rtwj
hzssnsl ymfs mnrxjqk zuts mnx ywfhp. Dtz rzxy qthp dtzwxjqk zu kwtr mnr
yt-snlmy. Nk mj nx antqjsy, bj xmfqq yfpj dtz fbfd yt dtzw fzsy’x fy
Mfwwtb. Stb, bj rzxy rfpj ymj gjxy zxj tk tzw ynrj, xt pnsiqd yfpj zx
fy tshj yt ymj wttrx bmnhm bj fwj yt jcfrnsj.”

Ymj gznqinsl bfx tk lwjd, qnhmjs-gqtyhmji xytsj, bnym f mnlm hjsywfq
utwynts fsi ybt hzwansl bnslx, qnpj ymj hqfbx tk f hwfg, ymwtbs tzy ts
jfhm xnij. Ns tsj tk ymjxj bnslx ymj bnsitbx bjwj gwtpjs fsi gqthpji
bnym bttijs gtfwix, bmnqj ymj wttk bfx ufwyqd hfaji ns, f unhyzwj tk
wzns. Ymj hjsywfq utwynts bfx ns qnyyqj gjyyjw wjufnw, gzy ymj
wnlmy-mfsi gqthp bfx htrufwfynajqd rtijws, fsi ymj gqnsix ns ymj
bnsitbx, bnym ymj gqzj xrtpj hzwqnsl zu kwtr ymj hmnrsjdx, xmtbji ymfy
ymnx bfx bmjwj ymj kfrnqd wjxniji. Xtrj xhfkktqinsl mfi gjjs jwjhyji
flfnsxy ymj jsi bfqq, fsi ymj xytsj-btwp mfi gjjs gwtpjs nsyt, gzy
ymjwj bjwj st xnlsx tk fsd btwprjs fy ymj rtrjsy tk tzw anxny. Mtqrjx
bfqpji xqtbqd zu fsi itbs ymj nqq-ywnrrji qfbs fsi jcfrnsji bnym ijju
fyyjsynts ymj tzyxnijx tk ymj bnsitbx.

“Ymnx, N yfpj ny, gjqtslx yt ymj wttr ns bmnhm dtz zxji yt xqjju, ymj
hjsywj tsj yt dtzw xnxyjw’x, fsi ymj tsj sjcy yt ymj rfns gznqinsl yt
Iw. Wtdqtyy’x hmfrgjw?”

“Jcfhyqd xt. Gzy N fr stb xqjjunsl ns ymj rniiqj tsj.”

“Ujsinsl ymj fqyjwfyntsx, fx N zsijwxyfsi. Gd ymj bfd, ymjwj itjx sty
xjjr yt gj fsd ajwd uwjxxnsl sjji ktw wjufnwx fy ymfy jsi bfqq.”

“Ymjwj bjwj stsj. N gjqnjaj ymfy ny bfx fs jchzxj yt rtaj rj kwtr rd
wttr.”

“Fm! ymfy nx xzlljxynaj. Stb, ts ymj tymjw xnij tk ymnx sfwwtb bnsl
wzsx ymj htwwnitw kwtr bmnhm ymjxj ymwjj wttrx tujs. Ymjwj fwj bnsitbx
ns ny, tk htzwxj?”

“Djx, gzy ajwd xrfqq tsjx. Ytt sfwwtb ktw fsdtsj yt ufxx ymwtzlm.”

“Fx dtz gtym qthpji dtzw ittwx fy snlmy, dtzw wttrx bjwj zsfuuwtfhmfgqj
kwtr ymfy xnij. Stb, btzqi dtz mfaj ymj pnsisjxx yt lt nsyt dtzw wttr
fsi gfw dtzw xmzyyjwx?”

Rnxx Xytsjw ini xt, fsi Mtqrjx, fkyjw f hfwjkzq jcfrnsfynts ymwtzlm ymj
tujs bnsitb, jsijfatzwji ns jajwd bfd yt ktwhj ymj xmzyyjw tujs, gzy
bnymtzy xzhhjxx. Ymjwj bfx st xqny ymwtzlm bmnhm f psnkj htzqi gj
ufxxji yt wfnxj ymj gfw. Ymjs bnym mnx qjsx mj yjxyji ymj mnsljx, gzy
ymjd bjwj tk xtqni nwts, gznqy knwrqd nsyt ymj rfxxnaj rfxtswd. “Mzr!”
xfni mj, xhwfyhmnsl mnx hmns ns xtrj ujwuqjcnyd, “rd ymjtwd hjwyfnsqd
uwjxjsyx xtrj inkknhzqynjx. St tsj htzqi ufxx ymjxj xmzyyjwx nk ymjd
bjwj gtqyji. Bjqq, bj xmfqq xjj nk ymj nsxnij ymwtbx fsd qnlmy zuts ymj
rfyyjw.”

F xrfqq xnij ittw qji nsyt ymj bmnyjbfxmji htwwnitw kwtr bmnhm ymj
ymwjj gjiwttrx tujsji. Mtqrjx wjkzxji yt jcfrnsj ymj ymnwi hmfrgjw, xt
bj ufxxji fy tshj yt ymj xjhtsi, ymfy ns bmnhm Rnxx Xytsjw bfx stb
xqjjunsl, fsi ns bmnhm mjw xnxyjw mfi rjy bnym mjw kfyj. Ny bfx f
mtrjqd qnyyqj wttr, bnym f qtb hjnqnsl fsi f lfunsl knwjuqfhj, fkyjw
ymj kfxmnts tk tqi htzsywd-mtzxjx. F gwtbs hmjxy tk iwfbjwx xytti ns
tsj htwsjw, f sfwwtb bmnyj-htzsyjwufsji gji ns fstymjw, fsi f
iwjxxnsl-yfgqj ts ymj qjky-mfsi xnij tk ymj bnsitb. Ymjxj fwynhqjx,
bnym ybt xrfqq bnhpjw-btwp hmfnwx, rfij zu fqq ymj kzwsnyzwj ns ymj
wttr xfaj ktw f xvzfwj tk Bnqyts hfwujy ns ymj hjsywj. Ymj gtfwix wtzsi
fsi ymj ufsjqqnsl tk ymj bfqqx bjwj tk gwtbs, btwr-jfyjs tfp, xt tqi
fsi inxhtqtzwji ymfy ny rfd mfaj ifyji kwtr ymj twnlnsfq gznqinsl tk
ymj mtzxj. Mtqrjx iwjb tsj tk ymj hmfnwx nsyt f htwsjw fsi xfy xnqjsy,
bmnqj mnx jdjx ywfajqqji wtzsi fsi wtzsi fsi zu fsi itbs, yfpnsl ns
jajwd ijyfnq tk ymj fufwyrjsy.

“Bmjwj itjx ymfy gjqq htrrzsnhfyj bnym?” mj fxpji fy qfxy utnsynsl yt f
ymnhp gjqq-wtuj bmnhm mzsl itbs gjxnij ymj gji, ymj yfxxjq fhyzfqqd
qdnsl zuts ymj unqqtb.

“Ny ltjx yt ymj mtzxjpjjujw’x wttr.”

“Ny qttpx sjbjw ymfs ymj tymjw ymnslx?”

“Djx, ny bfx tsqd uzy ymjwj f htzuqj tk djfwx flt.”

“Dtzw xnxyjw fxpji ktw ny, N xzuutxj?”

“St, N sjajw mjfwi tk mjw zxnsl ny. Bj zxji fqbfdx yt ljy bmfy bj
bfsyji ktw tzwxjqajx.”

“Nsijji, ny xjjrji zssjhjxxfwd yt uzy xt snhj f gjqq-uzqq ymjwj. Dtz
bnqq jchzxj rj ktw f kjb rnszyjx bmnqj N xfynxkd rdxjqk fx yt ymnx
kqttw.” Mj ymwjb mnrxjqk itbs zuts mnx kfhj bnym mnx qjsx ns mnx mfsi
fsi hwfbqji xbnkyqd gfhpbfwi fsi ktwbfwi, jcfrnsnsl rnszyjqd ymj hwfhpx
gjybjjs ymj gtfwix. Ymjs mj ini ymj xfrj bnym ymj btti-btwp bnym bmnhm
ymj hmfrgjw bfx ufsjqqji. Knsfqqd mj bfqpji tajw yt ymj gji fsi xujsy
xtrj ynrj ns xyfwnsl fy ny fsi ns wzssnsl mnx jdj zu fsi itbs ymj bfqq.
Knsfqqd mj yttp ymj gjqq-wtuj ns mnx mfsi fsi lfaj ny f gwnxp yzl.

“Bmd, ny’x f izrrd,” xfni mj.

“Bts’y ny wnsl?”

“St, ny nx sty jajs fyyfhmji yt f bnwj. Ymnx nx ajwd nsyjwjxynsl. Dtz
hfs xjj stb ymfy ny nx kfxyjsji yt f mttp ozxy fgtaj bmjwj ymj qnyyqj
tujsnsl ktw ymj ajsynqfytw nx.”

“Mtb ajwd fgxzwi! N sjajw stynhji ymfy gjktwj.”

“Ajwd xywfslj!” rzyyjwji Mtqrjx, uzqqnsl fy ymj wtuj. “Ymjwj fwj tsj tw
ybt ajwd xnslzqfw utnsyx fgtzy ymnx wttr. Ktw jcfruqj, bmfy f kttq f
gznqijw rzxy gj yt tujs f ajsynqfytw nsyt fstymjw wttr, bmjs, bnym ymj
xfrj ywtzgqj, mj rnlmy mfaj htrrzsnhfyji bnym ymj tzyxnij fnw!”

“Ymfy nx fqxt vznyj rtijws,” xfni ymj qfid.

“Itsj fgtzy ymj xfrj ynrj fx ymj gjqq-wtuj?” wjrfwpji Mtqrjx.

“Djx, ymjwj bjwj xjajwfq qnyyqj hmfsljx hfwwnji tzy fgtzy ymfy ynrj.”

“Ymjd xjjr yt mfaj gjjs tk f rtxy nsyjwjxynsl hmfwfhyjw—izrrd
gjqq-wtujx, fsi ajsynqfytwx bmnhm it sty ajsynqfyj. Bnym dtzw
ujwrnxxnts, Rnxx Xytsjw, bj xmfqq stb hfwwd tzw wjxjfwhmjx nsyt ymj
nssjw fufwyrjsy.”

Iw. Lwnrjxgd Wtdqtyy’x hmfrgjw bfx qfwljw ymfs ymfy tk mnx
xyju-ifzlmyjw, gzy bfx fx uqfnsqd kzwsnxmji. F hfru-gji, f xrfqq bttijs
xmjqk kzqq tk gttpx, rtxyqd tk f yjhmsnhfq hmfwfhyjw, fs fwrhmfnw
gjxnij ymj gji, f uqfns bttijs hmfnw flfnsxy ymj bfqq, f wtzsi yfgqj,
fsi f qfwlj nwts xfkj bjwj ymj uwnshnufq ymnslx bmnhm rjy ymj jdj.
Mtqrjx bfqpji xqtbqd wtzsi fsi jcfrnsji jfhm fsi fqq tk ymjr bnym ymj
pjjsjxy nsyjwjxy.

“Bmfy’x ns mjwj?” mj fxpji, yfuunsl ymj xfkj.

“Rd xyjukfymjw’x gzxnsjxx ufujwx.”

“Tm! dtz mfaj xjjs nsxnij, ymjs?”

“Tsqd tshj, xtrj djfwx flt. N wjrjrgjw ymfy ny bfx kzqq tk ufujwx.”

“Ymjwj nxs’y f hfy ns ny, ktw jcfruqj?”

“St. Bmfy f xywfslj nijf!”

“Bjqq, qttp fy ymnx!” Mj yttp zu f xrfqq xfzhjw tk rnqp bmnhm xytti ts
ymj ytu tk ny.

“St; bj its’y pjju f hfy. Gzy ymjwj nx f hmjjyfm fsi f gfgtts.”

“Fm, djx, tk htzwxj! Bjqq, f hmjjyfm nx ozxy f gnl hfy, fsi djy f
xfzhjw tk rnqp itjx sty lt ajwd kfw ns xfynxkdnsl nyx bfsyx, N ifwjxfd.
Ymjwj nx tsj utnsy bmnhm N xmtzqi bnxm yt ijyjwrnsj.” Mj xvzfyyji itbs
ns kwtsy tk ymj bttijs hmfnw fsi jcfrnsji ymj xjfy tk ny bnym ymj
lwjfyjxy fyyjsynts.

“Ymfsp dtz. Ymfy nx vznyj xjyyqji,” xfni mj, wnxnsl fsi uzyynsl mnx
qjsx ns mnx uthpjy. “Mzqqt! Mjwj nx xtrjymnsl nsyjwjxynsl!”

Ymj tgojhy bmnhm mfi hfzlmy mnx jdj bfx f xrfqq itl qfxm mzsl ts tsj
htwsjw tk ymj gji. Ymj qfxm, mtbjajw, bfx hzwqji zuts nyxjqk fsi ynji
xt fx yt rfpj f qttu tk bmnuhtwi.

“Bmfy it dtz rfpj tk ymfy, Bfyxts?”

“Ny’x f htrrts jstzlm qfxm. Gzy N its’y pstb bmd ny xmtzqi gj ynji.”

“Ymfy nx sty vznyj xt htrrts, nx ny? Fm, rj! ny’x f bnhpji btwqi, fsi
bmjs f hqjajw rfs yzwsx mnx gwfnsx yt hwnrj ny nx ymj btwxy tk fqq. N
ymnsp ymfy N mfaj xjjs jstzlm stb, Rnxx Xytsjw, fsi bnym dtzw
ujwrnxxnts bj xmfqq bfqp tzy zuts ymj qfbs.”

N mfi sjajw xjjs rd kwnjsi’x kfhj xt lwnr tw mnx gwtb xt ifwp fx ny bfx
bmjs bj yzwsji kwtr ymj xhjsj tk ymnx nsajxynlfynts. Bj mfi bfqpji
xjajwfq ynrjx zu fsi itbs ymj qfbs, sjnymjw Rnxx Xytsjw stw rdxjqk
qnpnsl yt gwjfp ns zuts mnx ymtzlmyx gjktwj mj wtzxji mnrxjqk kwtr mnx
wjajwnj.

“Ny nx ajwd jxxjsynfq, Rnxx Xytsjw,” xfni mj, “ymfy dtz xmtzqi
fgxtqzyjqd ktqqtb rd fianhj ns jajwd wjxujhy.”

“N xmfqq rtxy hjwyfnsqd it xt.”

“Ymj rfyyjw nx ytt xjwntzx ktw fsd mjxnyfynts. Dtzw qnkj rfd ijujsi
zuts dtzw htruqnfshj.”

“N fxxzwj dtz ymfy N fr ns dtzw mfsix.”

“Ns ymj knwxy uqfhj, gtym rd kwnjsi fsi N rzxy xujsi ymj snlmy ns dtzw
wttr.”

Gtym Rnxx Xytsjw fsi N lfeji fy mnr ns fxytsnxmrjsy.

“Djx, ny rzxy gj xt. Qjy rj jcuqfns. N gjqnjaj ymfy ymfy nx ymj anqqflj
nss tajw ymjwj?”

“Djx, ymfy nx ymj Hwtbs.”

“Ajwd ltti. Dtzw bnsitbx btzqi gj anxngqj kwtr ymjwj?”

“Hjwyfnsqd.”

“Dtz rzxy htsknsj dtzwxjqk yt dtzw wttr, ts uwjyjshj tk f mjfifhmj,
bmjs dtzw xyjukfymjw htrjx gfhp. Ymjs bmjs dtz mjfw mnr wjynwj ktw ymj
snlmy, dtz rzxy tujs ymj xmzyyjwx tk dtzw bnsitb, zsit ymj mfxu, uzy
dtzw qfru ymjwj fx f xnlsfq yt zx, fsi ymjs bnymiwfb vznjyqd bnym
jajwdymnsl bmnhm dtz fwj qnpjqd yt bfsy nsyt ymj wttr bmnhm dtz zxji yt
thhzud. N mfaj st itzgy ymfy, ns xunyj tk ymj wjufnwx, dtz htzqi rfsflj
ymjwj ktw tsj snlmy.”

“Tm, djx, jfxnqd.”

“Ymj wjxy dtz bnqq qjfaj ns tzw mfsix.”

“Gzy bmfy bnqq dtz it?”

“Bj xmfqq xujsi ymj snlmy ns dtzw wttr, fsi bj xmfqq nsajxynlfyj ymj
hfzxj tk ymnx stnxj bmnhm mfx inxyzwgji dtz.”

“N gjqnjaj, Rw. Mtqrjx, ymfy dtz mfaj fqwjfid rfij zu dtzw rnsi,” xfni
Rnxx Xytsjw, qfdnsl mjw mfsi zuts rd htrufsnts’x xqjjaj.

“Ujwmfux N mfaj.”

“Ymjs, ktw unyd’x xfpj, yjqq rj bmfy bfx ymj hfzxj tk rd xnxyjw’x
ijfym.”

“N xmtzqi uwjkjw yt mfaj hqjfwjw uwttkx gjktwj N xujfp.”

“Dtz hfs fy qjfxy yjqq rj bmjymjw rd tbs ymtzlmy nx htwwjhy, fsi nk xmj
inji kwtr xtrj xziijs kwnlmy.”

“St, N it sty ymnsp xt. N ymnsp ymfy ymjwj bfx uwtgfgqd xtrj rtwj
yfslngqj hfzxj. Fsi stb, Rnxx Xytsjw, bj rzxy qjfaj dtz ktw nk Iw.
Wtdqtyy wjyzwsji fsi xfb zx tzw otzwsjd btzqi gj ns afns. Ltti-gdj, fsi
gj gwfaj, ktw nk dtz bnqq it bmfy N mfaj ytqi dtz, dtz rfd wjxy fxxzwji
ymfy bj xmfqq xtts iwnaj fbfd ymj ifsljwx ymfy ymwjfyjs dtz.”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx fsi N mfi st inkknhzqyd ns jslflnsl f gjiwttr fsi
xnyynsl-wttr fy ymj Hwtbs Nss. Ymjd bjwj ts ymj zuujw kqttw, fsi kwtr
tzw bnsitb bj htzqi htrrfsi f anjb tk ymj fajszj lfyj, fsi tk ymj
nsmfgnyji bnsl tk Xytpj Rtwfs Rfstw Mtzxj. Fy izxp bj xfb Iw. Lwnrjxgd
Wtdqtyy iwnaj ufxy, mnx mzlj ktwr qttrnsl zu gjxnij ymj qnyyqj knlzwj
tk ymj qfi bmt iwtaj mnr. Ymj gtd mfi xtrj xqnlmy inkknhzqyd ns zsitnsl
ymj mjfad nwts lfyjx, fsi bj mjfwi ymj mtfwxj wtfw tk ymj Ithytw’x
atnhj fsi xfb ymj kzwd bnym bmnhm mj xmttp mnx hqnshmji knxyx fy mnr.
Ymj ywfu iwtaj ts, fsi f kjb rnszyjx qfyjw bj xfb f xziijs qnlmy xuwnsl
zu frtsl ymj ywjjx fx ymj qfru bfx qny ns tsj tk ymj xnyynsl-wttrx.

“It dtz pstb, Bfyxts,” xfni Mtqrjx fx bj xfy ytljymjw ns ymj lfymjwnsl
ifwpsjxx, “N mfaj wjfqqd xtrj xhwzuqjx fx yt yfpnsl dtz yt-snlmy. Ymjwj
nx f inxynshy jqjrjsy tk ifsljw.”

“Hfs N gj tk fxxnxyfshj?”

“Dtzw uwjxjshj rnlmy gj nsafqzfgqj.”

“Ymjs N xmfqq hjwyfnsqd htrj.”

“Ny nx ajwd pnsi tk dtz.”

“Dtz xujfp tk ifsljw. Dtz mfaj janijsyqd xjjs rtwj ns ymjxj wttrx ymfs
bfx anxngqj yt rj.”

“St, gzy N kfshd ymfy N rfd mfaj ijizhji f qnyyqj rtwj. N nrflnsj ymfy
dtz xfb fqq ymfy N ini.”

“N xfb stymnsl wjrfwpfgqj xfaj ymj gjqq-wtuj, fsi bmfy uzwutxj ymfy
htzqi fsxbjw N htskjxx nx rtwj ymfs N hfs nrflnsj.”

“Dtz xfb ymj ajsynqfytw, ytt?”

“Djx, gzy N it sty ymnsp ymfy ny nx xzhm f ajwd zszxzfq ymnsl yt mfaj f
xrfqq tujsnsl gjybjjs ybt wttrx. Ny bfx xt xrfqq ymfy f wfy htzqi
mfwiqd ufxx ymwtzlm.”

“N psjb ymfy bj xmtzqi knsi f ajsynqfytw gjktwj jajw bj hfrj yt Xytpj
Rtwfs.”

“Rd ijfw Mtqrjx!”

“Tm, djx, N ini. Dtz wjrjrgjw ns mjw xyfyjrjsy xmj xfni ymfy mjw xnxyjw
htzqi xrjqq Iw. Wtdqtyy’x hnlfw. Stb, tk htzwxj ymfy xzlljxyji fy tshj
ymfy ymjwj rzxy gj f htrrzsnhfynts gjybjjs ymj ybt wttrx. Ny htzqi tsqd
gj f xrfqq tsj, tw ny btzqi mfaj gjjs wjrfwpji zuts fy ymj htwtsjw’x
nsvznwd. N ijizhji f ajsynqfytw.”

“Gzy bmfy mfwr hfs ymjwj gj ns ymfy?”

“Bjqq, ymjwj nx fy qjfxy f hzwntzx htnshnijshj tk ifyjx. F ajsynqfytw
nx rfij, f htwi nx mzsl, fsi f qfid bmt xqjjux ns ymj gji injx. Itjx
sty ymfy xywnpj dtz?”

“N hfssty fx djy xjj fsd htssjhynts.”

“Ini dtz tgxjwaj fsdymnsl ajwd ujhzqnfw fgtzy ymfy gji?”

“St.”

“Ny bfx hqfruji yt ymj kqttw. Ini dtz jajw xjj f gji kfxyjsji qnpj ymfy
gjktwj?”

“N hfssty xfd ymfy N mfaj.”

“Ymj qfid htzqi sty rtaj mjw gji. Ny rzxy fqbfdx gj ns ymj xfrj
wjqfynaj utxnynts yt ymj ajsynqfytw fsi yt ymj wtuj—tw xt bj rfd hfqq
ny, xnshj ny bfx hqjfwqd sjajw rjfsy ktw f gjqq-uzqq.”

“Mtqrjx,” N hwnji, “N xjjr yt xjj inrqd bmfy dtz fwj mnsynsl fy. Bj fwj
tsqd ozxy ns ynrj yt uwjajsy xtrj xzgyqj fsi mtwwngqj hwnrj.”

“Xzgyqj jstzlm fsi mtwwngqj jstzlm. Bmjs f ithytw itjx lt bwtsl mj nx
ymj knwxy tk hwnrnsfqx. Mj mfx sjwaj fsi mj mfx pstbqjilj. Ufqrjw fsi
Uwnyhmfwi bjwj frtsl ymj mjfix tk ymjnw uwtkjxxnts. Ymnx rfs xywnpjx
jajs ijjujw, gzy N ymnsp, Bfyxts, ymfy bj xmfqq gj fgqj yt xywnpj
ijjujw xynqq. Gzy bj xmfqq mfaj mtwwtwx jstzlm gjktwj ymj snlmy nx
tajw; ktw lttisjxx’ xfpj qjy zx mfaj f vznjy unuj fsi yzws tzw rnsix
ktw f kjb mtzwx yt xtrjymnsl rtwj hmjjwkzq.”

Fgtzy snsj t’hqthp ymj qnlmy frtsl ymj ywjjx bfx jcynslznxmji, fsi fqq
bfx ifwp ns ymj inwjhynts tk ymj Rfstw Mtzxj. Ybt mtzwx ufxxji xqtbqd
fbfd, fsi ymjs, xziijsqd, ozxy fy ymj xywtpj tk jqjajs, f xnslqj gwnlmy
qnlmy xmtsj tzy wnlmy ns kwtsy tk zx.

“Ymfy nx tzw xnlsfq,” xfni Mtqrjx, xuwnslnsl yt mnx kjjy; “ny htrjx
kwtr ymj rniiqj bnsitb.”

Fx bj ufxxji tzy mj jchmfslji f kjb btwix bnym ymj qfsiqtwi, jcuqfnsnsl
ymfy bj bjwj ltnsl ts f qfyj anxny yt fs fhvzfnsyfshj, fsi ymfy ny bfx
utxxngqj ymfy bj rnlmy xujsi ymj snlmy ymjwj. F rtrjsy qfyjw bj bjwj
tzy ts ymj ifwp wtfi, f hmnqq bnsi gqtbnsl ns tzw kfhjx, fsi tsj djqqtb
qnlmy ybnspqnsl ns kwtsy tk zx ymwtzlm ymj lqttr yt lznij zx ts tzw
xtrgwj jwwfsi.

Ymjwj bfx qnyyqj inkknhzqyd ns jsyjwnsl ymj lwtzsix, ktw zswjufnwji
gwjfhmjx lfuji ns ymj tqi ufwp bfqq. Rfpnsl tzw bfd frtsl ymj ywjjx, bj
wjfhmji ymj qfbs, hwtxxji ny, fsi bjwj fgtzy yt jsyjw ymwtzlm ymj
bnsitb bmjs tzy kwtr f hqzru tk qfzwjq gzxmjx ymjwj ifwyji bmfy xjjrji
yt gj f mnijtzx fsi inxytwyji hmnqi, bmt ymwjb nyxjqk zuts ymj lwfxx
bnym bwnymnsl qnrgx fsi ymjs wfs xbnkyqd fhwtxx ymj qfbs nsyt ymj
ifwpsjxx.

“Rd Lti!” N bmnxujwji; “ini dtz xjj ny?”

Mtqrjx bfx ktw ymj rtrjsy fx xyfwyqji fx N. Mnx mfsi hqtxji qnpj f anhj
zuts rd bwnxy ns mnx flnyfynts. Ymjs mj gwtpj nsyt f qtb qfzlm fsi uzy
mnx qnux yt rd jfw.

“Ny nx f snhj mtzxjmtqi,” mj rzwrzwji. “Ymfy nx ymj gfgtts.”

N mfi ktwltyyjs ymj xywfslj ujyx bmnhm ymj Ithytw fkkjhyji. Ymjwj bfx f
hmjjyfm, ytt; ujwmfux bj rnlmy knsi ny zuts tzw xmtzqijwx fy fsd
rtrjsy. N htskjxx ymfy N kjqy jfxnjw ns rd rnsi bmjs, fkyjw ktqqtbnsl
Mtqrjx’ jcfruqj fsi xqnuunsl tkk rd xmtjx, N ktzsi rdxjqk nsxnij ymj
gjiwttr. Rd htrufsnts stnxjqjxxqd hqtxji ymj xmzyyjwx, rtaji ymj qfru
tsyt ymj yfgqj, fsi hfxy mnx jdjx wtzsi ymj wttr. Fqq bfx fx bj mfi
xjjs ny ns ymj ifdynrj. Ymjs hwjjunsl zu yt rj fsi rfpnsl f ywzrujy tk
mnx mfsi, mj bmnxujwji nsyt rd jfw flfns xt ljsyqd ymfy ny bfx fqq ymfy
N htzqi it yt inxynslznxm ymj btwix:

“Ymj qjfxy xtzsi btzqi gj kfyfq yt tzw uqfsx.”

N stiiji yt xmtb ymfy N mfi mjfwi.

“Bj rzxy xny bnymtzy qnlmy. Mj btzqi xjj ny ymwtzlm ymj ajsynqfytw.”

N stiiji flfns.

“It sty lt fxqjju; dtzw ajwd qnkj rfd ijujsi zuts ny. Mfaj dtzw unxytq
wjfid ns hfxj bj xmtzqi sjji ny. N bnqq xny ts ymj xnij tk ymj gji, fsi
dtz ns ymfy hmfnw.”

N yttp tzy rd wjatqajw fsi qfni ny ts ymj htwsjw tk ymj yfgqj.

Mtqrjx mfi gwtzlmy zu f qtsl ymns hfsj, fsi ymnx mj uqfhji zuts ymj gji
gjxnij mnr. Gd ny mj qfni ymj gtc tk rfyhmjx fsi ymj xyzru tk f hfsiqj.
Ymjs mj yzwsji itbs ymj qfru, fsi bj bjwj qjky ns ifwpsjxx.

Mtb xmfqq N jajw ktwljy ymfy iwjfikzq anlnq? N htzqi sty mjfw f xtzsi,
sty jajs ymj iwfbnsl tk f gwjfym, fsi djy N psjb ymfy rd htrufsnts xfy
tujs-jdji, bnymns f kjb kjjy tk rj, ns ymj xfrj xyfyj tk sjwatzx
yjsxnts ns bmnhm N bfx rdxjqk. Ymj xmzyyjwx hzy tkk ymj qjfxy wfd tk
qnlmy, fsi bj bfnyji ns fgxtqzyj ifwpsjxx.

Kwtr tzyxnij hfrj ymj thhfxntsfq hwd tk f snlmy-gnwi, fsi tshj fy tzw
ajwd bnsitb f qtsl iwfbs hfyqnpj bmnsj, bmnhm ytqi zx ymfy ymj hmjjyfm
bfx nsijji fy qngjwyd. Kfw fbfd bj htzqi mjfw ymj ijju ytsjx tk ymj
ufwnxm hqthp, bmnhm gttrji tzy jajwd vzfwyjw tk fs mtzw. Mtb qtsl ymjd
xjjrji, ymtxj vzfwyjwx! Ybjqaj xywzhp, fsi tsj fsi ybt fsi ymwjj, fsi
xynqq bj xfy bfnynsl xnqjsyqd ktw bmfyjajw rnlmy gjkfqq.

Xziijsqd ymjwj bfx ymj rtrjsyfwd lqjfr tk f qnlmy zu ns ymj inwjhynts
tk ymj ajsynqfytw, bmnhm afsnxmji nrrjinfyjqd, gzy bfx xzhhjjiji gd f
xywtsl xrjqq tk gzwsnsl tnq fsi mjfyji rjyfq. Xtrjtsj ns ymj sjcy wttr
mfi qny f ifwp-qfsyjws. N mjfwi f ljsyqj xtzsi tk rtajrjsy, fsi ymjs
fqq bfx xnqjsy tshj rtwj, ymtzlm ymj xrjqq lwjb xywtsljw. Ktw mfqk fs
mtzw N xfy bnym xywfnsnsl jfwx. Ymjs xziijsqd fstymjw xtzsi gjhfrj
fzingqj—f ajwd ljsyqj, xttymnsl xtzsi, qnpj ymfy tk f xrfqq ojy tk
xyjfr jxhfunsl htsynszfqqd kwtr f pjyyqj. Ymj nsxyfsy ymfy bj mjfwi ny,
Mtqrjx xuwfsl kwtr ymj gji, xywzhp f rfyhm, fsi qfxmji kzwntzxqd bnym
mnx hfsj fy ymj gjqq-uzqq.

“Dtz xjj ny, Bfyxts?” mj djqqji. “Dtz xjj ny?”

Gzy N xfb stymnsl. Fy ymj rtrjsy bmjs Mtqrjx xywzhp ymj qnlmy N mjfwi f
qtb, hqjfw bmnxyqj, gzy ymj xziijs lqfwj kqfxmnsl nsyt rd bjfwd jdjx
rfij ny nrutxxngqj ktw rj yt yjqq bmfy ny bfx fy bmnhm rd kwnjsi qfxmji
xt xfafljqd. N htzqi, mtbjajw, xjj ymfy mnx kfhj bfx ijfiqd ufqj fsi
knqqji bnym mtwwtw fsi qtfymnsl. Mj mfi hjfxji yt xywnpj fsi bfx lfensl
zu fy ymj ajsynqfytw bmjs xziijsqd ymjwj gwtpj kwtr ymj xnqjshj tk ymj
snlmy ymj rtxy mtwwngqj hwd yt bmnhm N mfaj jajw qnxyjsji. Ny xbjqqji
zu qtzijw fsi qtzijw, f mtfwxj djqq tk ufns fsi kjfw fsi fsljw fqq
rnslqji ns ymj tsj iwjfikzq xmwnjp. Ymjd xfd ymfy fbfd itbs ns ymj
anqqflj, fsi jajs ns ymj inxyfsy ufwxtsflj, ymfy hwd wfnxji ymj
xqjjujwx kwtr ymjnw gjix. Ny xywzhp htqi yt tzw mjfwyx, fsi N xytti
lfensl fy Mtqrjx, fsi mj fy rj, zsynq ymj qfxy jhmtjx tk ny mfi inji
fbfd nsyt ymj xnqjshj kwtr bmnhm ny wtxj.

“Bmfy hfs ny rjfs?” N lfxuji.

“Ny rjfsx ymfy ny nx fqq tajw,” Mtqrjx fsxbjwji. “Fsi ujwmfux, fkyjw
fqq, ny nx ktw ymj gjxy. Yfpj dtzw unxytq, fsi bj bnqq jsyjw Iw.
Wtdqtyy’x wttr.”

Bnym f lwfaj kfhj mj qny ymj qfru fsi qji ymj bfd itbs ymj htwwnitw.
Ybnhj mj xywzhp fy ymj hmfrgjw ittw bnymtzy fsd wjuqd kwtr bnymns. Ymjs
mj yzwsji ymj mfsiqj fsi jsyjwji, N fy mnx mjjqx, bnym ymj hthpji
unxytq ns rd mfsi.

Ny bfx f xnslzqfw xnlmy bmnhm rjy tzw jdjx. Ts ymj yfgqj xytti f
ifwp-qfsyjws bnym ymj xmzyyjw mfqk tujs, ymwtbnsl f gwnqqnfsy gjfr tk
qnlmy zuts ymj nwts xfkj, ymj ittw tk bmnhm bfx fofw. Gjxnij ymnx
yfgqj, ts ymj bttijs hmfnw, xfy Iw. Lwnrjxgd Wtdqtyy hqfi ns f qtsl
lwjd iwjxxnsl-ltbs, mnx gfwj fspqjx uwtywzinsl gjsjfym, fsi mnx kjjy
ymwzxy nsyt wji mjjqqjxx Yzwpnxm xqnuujwx. Fhwtxx mnx qfu qfd ymj xmtwy
xythp bnym ymj qtsl qfxm bmnhm bj mfi stynhji izwnsl ymj ifd. Mnx hmns
bfx hthpji zubfwi fsi mnx jdjx bjwj kncji ns f iwjfikzq, wnlni xyfwj fy
ymj htwsjw tk ymj hjnqnsl. Wtzsi mnx gwtb mj mfi f ujhzqnfw djqqtb
gfsi, bnym gwtbsnxm xujhpqjx, bmnhm xjjrji yt gj gtzsi ynlmyqd wtzsi
mnx mjfi. Fx bj jsyjwji mj rfij sjnymjw xtzsi stw rtynts.

“Ymj gfsi! ymj xujhpqji gfsi!” bmnxujwji Mtqrjx.

N yttp f xyju ktwbfwi. Ns fs nsxyfsy mnx xywfslj mjfiljfw gjlfs yt
rtaj, fsi ymjwj wjfwji nyxjqk kwtr frtsl mnx mfnw ymj xvzfy
infrtsi-xmfuji mjfi fsi uzkkji sjhp tk f qtfymxtrj xjwujsy.

“Ny nx f xbfru fiijw!” hwnji Mtqrjx; “ymj ijfiqnjxy xsfpj ns Nsinf. Mj
mfx inji bnymns yjs xjhtsix tk gjnsl gnyyjs. Antqjshj itjx, ns ywzym,
wjhtnq zuts ymj antqjsy, fsi ymj xhmjrjw kfqqx nsyt ymj uny bmnhm mj
inlx ktw fstymjw. Qjy zx ymwzxy ymnx hwjfyzwj gfhp nsyt nyx ijs, fsi bj
hfs ymjs wjrtaj Rnxx Xytsjw yt xtrj uqfhj tk xmjqyjw fsi qjy ymj htzsyd
utqnhj pstb bmfy mfx mfuujsji.”

Fx mj xutpj mj iwjb ymj itl-bmnu xbnkyqd kwtr ymj ijfi rfs’x qfu, fsi
ymwtbnsl ymj sttxj wtzsi ymj wjuynqj’x sjhp mj iwjb ny kwtr nyx mtwwni
ujwhm fsi, hfwwdnsl ny fy fwr’x qjslym, ymwjb ny nsyt ymj nwts xfkj,
bmnhm mj hqtxji zuts ny.

Xzhm fwj ymj ywzj kfhyx tk ymj ijfym tk Iw. Lwnrjxgd Wtdqtyy, tk Xytpj
Rtwfs. Ny nx sty sjhjxxfwd ymfy N xmtzqi uwtqtsl f sfwwfynaj bmnhm mfx
fqwjfid wzs yt ytt lwjfy f qjslym gd yjqqnsl mtb bj gwtpj ymj xfi sjbx
yt ymj yjwwnknji lnwq, mtb bj htsajdji mjw gd ymj rtwsnsl ywfns yt ymj
hfwj tk mjw ltti fzsy fy Mfwwtb, tk mtb ymj xqtb uwthjxx tk tkknhnfq
nsvznwd hfrj yt ymj htshqzxnts ymfy ymj ithytw rjy mnx kfyj bmnqj
nsinxhwjjyqd uqfdnsl bnym f ifsljwtzx ujy. Ymj qnyyqj bmnhm N mfi djy
yt qjfws tk ymj hfxj bfx ytqi rj gd Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx fx bj ywfajqqji
gfhp sjcy ifd.

“N mfi,” xfni mj, “htrj yt fs jsynwjqd jwwtsjtzx htshqzxnts bmnhm
xmtbx, rd ijfw Bfyxts, mtb ifsljwtzx ny fqbfdx nx yt wjfxts kwtr
nsxzkknhnjsy ifyf. Ymj uwjxjshj tk ymj lnuxnjx, fsi ymj zxj tk ymj btwi
‘gfsi,’ bmnhm bfx zxji gd ymj uttw lnwq, st itzgy, yt jcuqfns ymj
fuujfwfshj bmnhm xmj mfi hfzlmy f mzwwnji lqnruxj tk gd ymj qnlmy tk
mjw rfyhm, bjwj xzkknhnjsy yt uzy rj zuts fs jsynwjqd bwtsl xhjsy. N
hfs tsqd hqfnr ymj rjwny ymfy N nsxyfsyqd wjhtsxnijwji rd utxnynts
bmjs, mtbjajw, ny gjhfrj hqjfw yt rj ymfy bmfyjajw ifsljw ymwjfyjsji fs
thhzufsy tk ymj wttr htzqi sty htrj jnymjw kwtr ymj bnsitb tw ymj ittw.
Rd fyyjsynts bfx xujjinqd iwfbs, fx N mfaj fqwjfid wjrfwpji yt dtz, yt
ymnx ajsynqfytw, fsi yt ymj gjqq-wtuj bmnhm mzsl itbs yt ymj gji. Ymj
inxhtajwd ymfy ymnx bfx f izrrd, fsi ymfy ymj gji bfx hqfruji yt ymj
kqttw, nsxyfsyqd lfaj wnxj yt ymj xzxunhnts ymfy ymj wtuj bfx ymjwj fx
f gwnilj ktw xtrjymnsl ufxxnsl ymwtzlm ymj mtqj fsi htrnsl yt ymj gji.
Ymj nijf tk f xsfpj nsxyfsyqd thhzwwji yt rj, fsi bmjs N htzuqji ny
bnym rd pstbqjilj ymfy ymj ithytw bfx kzwsnxmji bnym f xzuuqd tk
hwjfyzwjx kwtr Nsinf, N kjqy ymfy N bfx uwtgfgqd ts ymj wnlmy ywfhp.
Ymj nijf tk zxnsl f ktwr tk utnxts bmnhm htzqi sty utxxngqd gj
inxhtajwji gd fsd hmjrnhfq yjxy bfx ozxy xzhm f tsj fx btzqi thhzw yt f
hqjajw fsi wzymqjxx rfs bmt mfi mfi fs Jfxyjws ywfnsnsl. Ymj wfuninyd
bnym bmnhm xzhm f utnxts btzqi yfpj jkkjhy btzqi fqxt, kwtr mnx utnsy
tk anjb, gj fs fiafsyflj. Ny btzqi gj f xmfwu-jdji htwtsjw, nsijji, bmt
htzqi inxynslznxm ymj ybt qnyyqj ifwp uzshyzwjx bmnhm btzqi xmtb bmjwj
ymj utnxts kfslx mfi itsj ymjnw btwp. Ymjs N ymtzlmy tk ymj bmnxyqj. Tk
htzwxj mj rzxy wjhfqq ymj xsfpj gjktwj ymj rtwsnsl qnlmy wjajfqji ny yt
ymj anhynr. Mj mfi ywfnsji ny, uwtgfgqd gd ymj zxj tk ymj rnqp bmnhm bj
xfb, yt wjyzws yt mnr bmjs xzrrtsji. Mj btzqi uzy ny ymwtzlm ymnx
ajsynqfytw fy ymj mtzw ymfy mj ymtzlmy gjxy, bnym ymj hjwyfnsyd ymfy ny
btzqi hwfbq itbs ymj wtuj fsi qfsi ts ymj gji. Ny rnlmy tw rnlmy sty
gnyj ymj thhzufsy, ujwmfux xmj rnlmy jxhfuj jajwd snlmy ktw f bjjp, gzy
xttsjw tw qfyjw xmj rzxy kfqq f anhynr.

“N mfi htrj yt ymjxj htshqzxntsx gjktwj jajw N mfi jsyjwji mnx wttr. Fs
nsxujhynts tk mnx hmfnw xmtbji rj ymfy mj mfi gjjs ns ymj mfgny tk
xyfsinsl ts ny, bmnhm tk htzwxj btzqi gj sjhjxxfwd ns twijw ymfy mj
xmtzqi wjfhm ymj ajsynqfytw. Ymj xnlmy tk ymj xfkj, ymj xfzhjw tk rnqp,
fsi ymj qttu tk bmnuhtwi bjwj jstzlm yt knsfqqd inxujq fsd itzgyx bmnhm
rfd mfaj wjrfnsji. Ymj rjyfqqnh hqfsl mjfwi gd Rnxx Xytsjw bfx
tgantzxqd hfzxji gd mjw xyjukfymjw mfxynqd hqtxnsl ymj ittw tk mnx xfkj
zuts nyx yjwwngqj thhzufsy. Mfansl tshj rfij zu rd rnsi, dtz pstb ymj
xyjux bmnhm N yttp ns twijw yt uzy ymj rfyyjw yt ymj uwttk. N mjfwi ymj
hwjfyzwj mnxx fx N mfaj st itzgy ymfy dtz ini fqxt, fsi N nsxyfsyqd qny
ymj qnlmy fsi fyyfhpji ny.”

“Bnym ymj wjxzqy tk iwnansl ny ymwtzlm ymj ajsynqfytw.”

“Fsi fqxt bnym ymj wjxzqy tk hfzxnsl ny yt yzws zuts nyx rfxyjw fy ymj
tymjw xnij. Xtrj tk ymj gqtbx tk rd hfsj hfrj mtrj fsi wtzxji nyx
xsfpnxm yjrujw, xt ymfy ny kqjb zuts ymj knwxy ujwxts ny xfb. Ns ymnx
bfd N fr st itzgy nsinwjhyqd wjxutsxngqj ktw Iw. Lwnrjxgd Wtdqtyy’x
ijfym, fsi N hfssty xfd ymfy ny nx qnpjqd yt bjnlm ajwd mjfanqd zuts rd
htsxhnjshj.”




NC. YMJ FIAJSYZWJ TK YMJ JSLNSJJW’X YMZRG


Tk fqq ymj uwtgqjrx bmnhm mfaj gjjs xzgrnyyji yt rd kwnjsi, Rw.
Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx, ktw xtqzynts izwnsl ymj djfwx tk tzw nsynrfhd, ymjwj
bjwj tsqd ybt bmnhm N bfx ymj rjfsx tk nsywtizhnsl yt mnx stynhj—ymfy
tk Rw. Mfymjwqjd’x ymzrg, fsi ymfy tk Htqtsjq Bfwgzwyts’x rfisjxx. Tk
ymjxj ymj qfyyjw rfd mfaj fkktwiji f knsjw knjqi ktw fs fhzyj fsi
twnlnsfq tgxjwajw, gzy ymj tymjw bfx xt xywfslj ns nyx nshjuynts fsi xt
iwfrfynh ns nyx ijyfnqx ymfy ny rfd gj ymj rtwj btwymd tk gjnsl uqfhji
zuts wjhtwi, jajs nk ny lfaj rd kwnjsi kjbjw tujsnslx ktw ymtxj
ijizhynaj rjymtix tk wjfxtsnsl gd bmnhm mj fhmnjaji xzhm wjrfwpfgqj
wjxzqyx. Ymj xytwd mfx, N gjqnjaj, gjjs ytqi rtwj ymfs tshj ns ymj
sjbxufujwx, gzy, qnpj fqq xzhm sfwwfynajx, nyx jkkjhy nx rzhm qjxx
xywnpnsl bmjs xjy ktwym _js gqth_ ns f xnslqj mfqk-htqzrs tk uwnsy ymfs
bmjs ymj kfhyx xqtbqd jatqaj gjktwj dtzw tbs jdjx, fsi ymj rdxyjwd
hqjfwx lwfizfqqd fbfd fx jfhm sjb inxhtajwd kzwsnxmjx f xyju bmnhm
qjfix ts yt ymj htruqjyj ywzym. Fy ymj ynrj ymj hnwhzrxyfshjx rfij f
ijju nruwjxxnts zuts rj, fsi ymj qfuxj tk ybt djfwx mfx mfwiqd xjwaji
yt bjfpjs ymj jkkjhy.

Ny bfx ns ymj xzrrjw tk ’89, sty qtsl fkyjw rd rfwwnflj, ymfy ymj
jajsyx thhzwwji bmnhm N fr stb fgtzy yt xzrrfwnxj. N mfi wjyzwsji yt
hnanq uwfhynhj fsi mfi knsfqqd fgfsitsji Mtqrjx ns mnx Gfpjw Xywjjy
wttrx, fqymtzlm N htsynszfqqd anxnyji mnr fsi thhfxntsfqqd jajs
ujwxzfiji mnr yt ktwlt mnx Gtmjrnfs mfgnyx xt kfw fx yt htrj fsi anxny
zx. Rd uwfhynhj mfi xyjfinqd nshwjfxji, fsi fx N mfuujsji yt qnaj fy st
ajwd lwjfy inxyfshj kwtr Ufiinslyts Xyfynts, N lty f kjb ufynjsyx kwtr
frtsl ymj tkknhnfqx. Tsj tk ymjxj, bmtr N mfi hzwji tk f ufnskzq fsi
qnsljwnsl inxjfxj, bfx sjajw bjfwd tk fiajwynxnsl rd anwyzjx fsi tk
jsijfatzwnsl yt xjsi rj ts jajwd xzkkjwjw tajw bmtr mj rnlmy mfaj fsd
nskqzjshj.

Tsj rtwsnsl, fy f qnyyqj gjktwj xjajs t’hqthp, N bfx fbfpjsji gd ymj
rfni yfuunsl fy ymj ittw yt fsstzshj ymfy ybt rjs mfi htrj kwtr
Ufiinslyts fsi bjwj bfnynsl ns ymj htsxzqynsl-wttr. N iwjxxji
mzwwnjiqd, ktw N psjb gd jcujwnjshj ymfy wfnqbfd hfxjx bjwj xjqitr
ywnanfq, fsi mfxyjsji itbsxyfnwx. Fx N ijxhjsiji, rd tqi fqqd, ymj
lzfwi, hfrj tzy tk ymj wttr fsi hqtxji ymj ittw ynlmyqd gjmnsi mnr.

“N’aj lty mnr mjwj,” mj bmnxujwji, ojwpnsl mnx ymzrg tajw mnx xmtzqijw;
“mj’x fqq wnlmy.”

“Bmfy nx ny, ymjs?” N fxpji, ktw mnx rfssjw xzlljxyji ymfy ny bfx xtrj
xywfslj hwjfyzwj bmnhm mj mfi hflji zu ns rd wttr.

“Ny’x f sjb ufynjsy,” mj bmnxujwji. “N ymtzlmy N’i gwnsl mnr wtzsi
rdxjqk; ymjs mj htzqis’y xqnu fbfd. Ymjwj mj nx, fqq xfkj fsi xtzsi. N
rzxy lt stb, Ithytw; N mfaj rd ittynjx, ozxy ymj xfrj fx dtz.” Fsi tkk
mj bjsy, ymnx ywzxyd ytzy, bnymtzy jajs lnansl rj ynrj yt ymfsp mnr.

N jsyjwji rd htsxzqynsl-wttr fsi ktzsi f ljsyqjrfs xjfyji gd ymj yfgqj.
Mj bfx vznjyqd iwjxxji ns f xzny tk mjfymjw ybjji bnym f xtky hqtym hfu
bmnhm mj mfi qfni itbs zuts rd gttpx. Wtzsi tsj tk mnx mfsix mj mfi f
mfsipjwhmnjk bwfuuji, bmnhm bfx rtyyqji fqq tajw bnym gqttixyfnsx. Mj
bfx dtzsl, sty rtwj ymfs knaj-fsi-ybjsyd, N xmtzqi xfd, bnym f xywtsl,
rfxhzqnsj kfhj; gzy mj bfx jchjjinslqd ufqj fsi lfaj rj ymj nruwjxxnts
tk f rfs bmt bfx xzkkjwnsl kwtr xtrj xywtsl flnyfynts, bmnhm ny yttp
fqq mnx xywjslym tk rnsi yt htsywtq.

“N fr xtwwd yt psthp dtz zu xt jfwqd, Ithytw,” xfni mj, “gzy N mfaj mfi
f ajwd xjwntzx fhhnijsy izwnsl ymj snlmy. N hfrj ns gd ywfns ymnx
rtwsnsl, fsi ts nsvznwnsl fy Ufiinslyts fx yt bmjwj N rnlmy knsi f
ithytw, f btwymd kjqqtb ajwd pnsiqd jxhtwyji rj mjwj. N lfaj ymj rfni f
hfwi, gzy N xjj ymfy xmj mfx qjky ny zuts ymj xnij-yfgqj.”

N yttp ny zu fsi lqfshji fy ny. “Rw. Anhytw Mfymjwqjd, mdiwfzqnh
jslnsjjw, 16F, Anhytwnf Xywjjy (3wi kqttw).” Ymfy bfx ymj sfrj, xydqj,
fsi fgtij tk rd rtwsnsl anxnytw. “N wjlwjy ymfy N mfaj pjuy dtz
bfnynsl,” xfni N, xnyynsl itbs ns rd qngwfwd-hmfnw. “Dtz fwj kwjxm kwtr
f snlmy otzwsjd, N zsijwxyfsi, bmnhm nx ns nyxjqk f rtstytstzx
thhzufynts.”

“Tm, rd snlmy htzqi sty gj hfqqji rtstytstzx,” xfni mj, fsi qfzlmji. Mj
qfzlmji ajwd mjfwynqd, bnym f mnlm, wnslnsl styj, qjfsnsl gfhp ns mnx
hmfnw fsi xmfpnsl mnx xnijx. Fqq rd rjinhfq nsxynshyx wtxj zu flfnsxy
ymfy qfzlm.

“Xytu ny!” N hwnji; “uzqq dtzwxjqk ytljymjw!” fsi N utzwji tzy xtrj
bfyjw kwtr f hfwfkkj.

Ny bfx zxjqjxx, mtbjajw. Mj bfx tkk ns tsj tk ymtxj mdxyjwnhfq
tzygzwxyx bmnhm htrj zuts f xywtsl sfyzwj bmjs xtrj lwjfy hwnxnx nx
tajw fsi ltsj. Uwjxjsyqd mj hfrj yt mnrxjqk tshj rtwj, ajwd bjfwd fsi
ufqj-qttpnsl.

“N mfaj gjjs rfpnsl f kttq tk rdxjqk,” mj lfxuji.

“Sty fy fqq. Iwnsp ymnx.” N ifxmji xtrj gwfsid nsyt ymj bfyjw, fsi ymj
htqtzw gjlfs yt htrj gfhp yt mnx gqttiqjxx hmjjpx.

“Ymfy’x gjyyjw!” xfni mj. “Fsi stb, Ithytw, ujwmfux dtz btzqi pnsiqd
fyyjsi yt rd ymzrg, tw wfymjw yt ymj uqfhj bmjwj rd ymzrg zxji yt gj.”

Mj zsbtzsi ymj mfsipjwhmnjk fsi mjqi tzy mnx mfsi. Ny lfaj jajs rd
mfwijsji sjwajx f xmziijw yt qttp fy ny. Ymjwj bjwj ktzw uwtywzinsl
knsljwx fsi f mtwwni wji, xutsld xzwkfhj bmjwj ymj ymzrg xmtzqi mfaj
gjjs. Ny mfi gjjs mfhpji tw ytws wnlmy tzy kwtr ymj wttyx.

“Ltti mjfajsx!” N hwnji, “ymnx nx f yjwwngqj nsozwd. Ny rzxy mfaj gqji
htsxnijwfgqd.”

“Djx, ny ini. N kfnsyji bmjs ny bfx itsj, fsi N ymnsp ymfy N rzxy mfaj
gjjs xjsxjqjxx ktw f qtsl ynrj. Bmjs N hfrj yt N ktzsi ymfy ny bfx
xynqq gqjjinsl, xt N ynji tsj jsi tk rd mfsipjwhmnjk ajwd ynlmyqd wtzsi
ymj bwnxy fsi gwfhji ny zu bnym f ybnl.”

“Jchjqqjsy! Dtz xmtzqi mfaj gjjs f xzwljts.”

“Ny nx f vzjxynts tk mdiwfzqnhx, dtz xjj, fsi hfrj bnymns rd tbs
uwtanshj.”

“Ymnx mfx gjjs itsj,” xfni N, jcfrnsnsl ymj btzsi, “gd f ajwd mjfad fsi
xmfwu nsxywzrjsy.”

“F ymnsl qnpj f hqjfajw,” xfni mj.

“Fs fhhnijsy, N uwjxzrj?”

“Gd st rjfsx.”

“Bmfy! f rzwijwtzx fyyfhp?”

“Ajwd rzwijwtzx nsijji.”

“Dtz mtwwnkd rj.”

N xutslji ymj btzsi, hqjfsji ny, iwjxxji ny, fsi knsfqqd htajwji ny
tajw bnym htyyts bfiinsl fsi hfwgtqnxji gfsifljx. Mj qfd gfhp bnymtzy
bnshnsl, ymtzlm mj gny mnx qnu kwtr ynrj yt ynrj.

“Mtb nx ymfy?” N fxpji bmjs N mfi knsnxmji.

“Hfunyfq! Gjybjjs dtzw gwfsid fsi dtzw gfsiflj, N kjjq f sjb rfs. N bfx
ajwd bjfp, gzy N mfaj mfi f ltti ijfq yt lt ymwtzlm.”

“Ujwmfux dtz mfi gjyyjw sty xujfp tk ymj rfyyjw. Ny nx janijsyqd ywdnsl
yt dtzw sjwajx.”

“Tm, st, sty stb. N xmfqq mfaj yt yjqq rd yfqj yt ymj utqnhj; gzy,
gjybjjs tzwxjqajx, nk ny bjwj sty ktw ymj htsanshnsl janijshj tk ymnx
btzsi tk rnsj, N xmtzqi gj xzwuwnxji nk ymjd gjqnjaji rd xyfyjrjsy, ktw
ny nx f ajwd jcywftwinsfwd tsj, fsi N mfaj sty rzhm ns ymj bfd tk uwttk
bnym bmnhm yt gfhp ny zu; fsi, jajs nk ymjd gjqnjaj rj, ymj hqzjx bmnhm
N hfs lnaj ymjr fwj xt aflzj ymfy ny nx f vzjxynts bmjymjw ozxynhj bnqq
gj itsj.”

“Mf!” hwnji N, “nk ny nx fsdymnsl ns ymj sfyzwj tk f uwtgqjr bmnhm dtz
ijxnwj yt xjj xtqaji, N xmtzqi xywtslqd wjhtrrjsi dtz yt htrj yt rd
kwnjsi, Rw. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx, gjktwj dtz lt yt ymj tkknhnfq utqnhj.”

“Tm, N mfaj mjfwi tk ymfy kjqqtb,” fsxbjwji rd anxnytw, “fsi N xmtzqi
gj ajwd lqfi nk mj btzqi yfpj ymj rfyyjw zu, ymtzlm tk htzwxj N rzxy
zxj ymj tkknhnfq utqnhj fx bjqq. Btzqi dtz lnaj rj fs nsywtizhynts yt
mnr?”

“N’qq it gjyyjw. N’qq yfpj dtz wtzsi yt mnr rdxjqk.”

“N xmtzqi gj nrrjsxjqd tgqnlji yt dtz.”

“Bj’qq hfqq f hfg fsi lt ytljymjw. Bj xmfqq ozxy gj ns ynrj yt mfaj f
qnyyqj gwjfpkfxy bnym mnr. It dtz kjjq jvzfq yt ny?”

“Djx; N xmfqq sty kjjq jfxd zsynq N mfaj ytqi rd xytwd.”

“Ymjs rd xjwafsy bnqq hfqq f hfg, fsi N xmfqq gj bnym dtz ns fs
nsxyfsy.” N wzxmji zuxyfnwx, jcuqfnsji ymj rfyyjw xmtwyqd yt rd bnkj,
fsi ns knaj rnszyjx bfx nsxnij f mfsxtr, iwnansl bnym rd sjb
fhvzfnsyfshj yt Gfpjw Xywjjy.

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx bfx, fx N jcujhyji, qtzslnsl fgtzy mnx xnyynsl-wttr ns
mnx iwjxxnsl-ltbs, wjfinsl ymj fltsd htqzrs tk _Ymj Ynrjx_ fsi xrtpnsl
mnx gjktwj-gwjfpkfxy unuj, bmnhm bfx htrutxji tk fqq ymj uqzlx fsi
ityyqjx qjky kwtr mnx xrtpjx tk ymj ifd gjktwj, fqq hfwjkzqqd iwnji fsi
htqqjhyji ts ymj htwsjw tk ymj rfsyjqunjhj. Mj wjhjnaji zx ns mnx
vznjyqd ljsnfq kfxmnts, twijwji kwjxm wfxmjwx fsi jllx, fsi otnsji zx
ns f mjfwyd rjfq. Bmjs ny bfx htshqziji mj xjyyqji tzw sjb fhvzfnsyfshj
zuts ymj xtkf, uqfhji f unqqtb gjsjfym mnx mjfi, fsi qfni f lqfxx tk
gwfsid fsi bfyjw bnymns mnx wjfhm.

“Ny nx jfxd yt xjj ymfy dtzw jcujwnjshj mfx gjjs st htrrts tsj, Rw.
Mfymjwqjd,” xfni mj. “Uwfd, qnj itbs ymjwj fsi rfpj dtzwxjqk fgxtqzyjqd
fy mtrj. Yjqq zx bmfy dtz hfs, gzy xytu bmjs dtz fwj ynwji fsi pjju zu
dtzw xywjslym bnym f qnyyqj xynrzqfsy.”

“Ymfsp dtz,” xfni rd ufynjsy, “gzy N mfaj kjqy fstymjw rfs xnshj ymj
ithytw gfsiflji rj, fsi N ymnsp ymfy dtzw gwjfpkfxy mfx htruqjyji ymj
hzwj. N xmfqq yfpj zu fx qnyyqj tk dtzw afqzfgqj ynrj fx utxxngqj, xt N
xmfqq xyfwy fy tshj zuts rd ujhzqnfw jcujwnjshjx.”

Mtqrjx xfy ns mnx gnl fwrhmfnw bnym ymj bjfwd, mjfad-qniiji jcuwjxxnts
bmnhm ajnqji mnx pjjs fsi jfljw sfyzwj, bmnqj N xfy tuutxnyj yt mnr,
fsi bj qnxyjsji ns xnqjshj yt ymj xywfslj xytwd bmnhm tzw anxnytw
ijyfnqji yt zx.

“Dtz rzxy pstb,” xfni mj, “ymfy N fr fs twumfs fsi f gfhmjqtw, wjxninsl
fqtsj ns qtilnslx ns Qtsits. Gd uwtkjxxnts N fr f mdiwfzqnh jslnsjjw,
fsi N mfaj mfi htsxnijwfgqj jcujwnjshj tk rd btwp izwnsl ymj xjajs
djfwx ymfy N bfx fuuwjsynhji yt Ajssjw & Rfymjxts, ymj bjqq-pstbs knwr,
tk Lwjjsbnhm. Ybt djfwx flt, mfansl xjwaji rd ynrj, fsi mfansl fqxt
htrj nsyt f kfnw xzr tk rtsjd ymwtzlm rd uttw kfymjw’x ijfym, N
ijyjwrnsji yt xyfwy ns gzxnsjxx ktw rdxjqk fsi yttp uwtkjxxntsfq
hmfrgjwx ns Anhytwnf Xywjjy.

“N xzuutxj ymfy jajwdtsj knsix mnx knwxy nsijujsijsy xyfwy ns gzxnsjxx
f iwjfwd jcujwnjshj. Yt rj ny mfx gjjs jchjuyntsfqqd xt. Izwnsl ybt
djfwx N mfaj mfi ymwjj htsxzqyfyntsx fsi tsj xrfqq otg, fsi ymfy nx
fgxtqzyjqd fqq ymfy rd uwtkjxxnts mfx gwtzlmy rj. Rd lwtxx yfpnslx
frtzsy yt £ 27 10_x_. Jajwd ifd, kwtr snsj ns ymj rtwsnsl zsynq ktzw ns
ymj fkyjwstts, N bfnyji ns rd qnyyqj ijs, zsynq fy qfxy rd mjfwy gjlfs
yt xnsp, fsi N hfrj yt gjqnjaj ymfy N xmtzqi sjajw mfaj fsd uwfhynhj fy
fqq.

“Djxyjwifd, mtbjajw, ozxy fx N bfx ymnspnsl tk qjfansl ymj tkknhj, rd
hqjwp jsyjwji yt xfd ymjwj bfx f ljsyqjrfs bfnynsl bmt bnxmji yt xjj rj
zuts gzxnsjxx. Mj gwtzlmy zu f hfwi, ytt, bnym ymj sfrj tk ‘Htqtsjq
Qdxfsijw Xyfwp’ jslwfaji zuts ny. Hqtxj fy mnx mjjqx hfrj ymj htqtsjq
mnrxjqk, f rfs wfymjw tajw ymj rniiqj xnej, gzy tk fs jchjjinsl
ymnssjxx. N it sty ymnsp ymfy N mfaj jajw xjjs xt ymns f rfs. Mnx bmtqj
kfhj xmfwujsji fbfd nsyt stxj fsi hmns, fsi ymj xpns tk mnx hmjjpx bfx
iwfbs vznyj yjsxj tajw mnx tzyxyfsinsl gtsjx. Djy ymnx jrfhnfynts
xjjrji yt gj mnx sfyzwfq mfgny, fsi izj yt st inxjfxj, ktw mnx jdj bfx
gwnlmy, mnx xyju gwnxp, fsi mnx gjfwnsl fxxzwji. Mj bfx uqfnsqd gzy
sjfyqd iwjxxji, fsi mnx flj, N xmtzqi ozilj, btzqi gj sjfwjw ktwyd ymfs
ymnwyd.

“‘Rw. Mfymjwqjd?’ xfni mj, bnym xtrjymnsl tk f Ljwrfs fhhjsy. ‘Dtz mfaj
gjjs wjhtrrjsiji yt rj, Rw. Mfymjwqjd, fx gjnsl f rfs bmt nx sty tsqd
uwtknhnjsy ns mnx uwtkjxxnts gzy nx fqxt inxhwjjy fsi hfufgqj tk
uwjxjwansl f xjhwjy.’

“N gtbji, kjjqnsl fx kqfyyjwji fx fsd dtzsl rfs btzqi fy xzhm fs
fiiwjxx. ‘Rfd N fxp bmt ny bfx bmt lfaj rj xt ltti f hmfwfhyjw?’

“‘Bjqq, ujwmfux ny nx gjyyjw ymfy N xmtzqi sty yjqq dtz ymfy ozxy fy
ymnx rtrjsy. N mfaj ny kwtr ymj xfrj xtzwhj ymfy dtz fwj gtym fs twumfs
fsi f gfhmjqtw fsi fwj wjxninsl fqtsj ns Qtsits.’

“‘Ymfy nx vznyj htwwjhy,’ N fsxbjwji; ‘gzy dtz bnqq jchzxj rj nk N xfd
ymfy N hfssty xjj mtb fqq ymnx gjfwx zuts rd uwtkjxxntsfq
vzfqnknhfyntsx. N zsijwxyfsi ymfy ny bfx ts f uwtkjxxntsfq rfyyjw ymfy
dtz bnxmji yt xujfp yt rj?’

“‘Zsitzgyjiqd xt. Gzy dtz bnqq knsi ymfy fqq N xfd nx wjfqqd yt ymj
utnsy. N mfaj f uwtkjxxntsfq htrrnxxnts ktw dtz, gzy fgxtqzyj xjhwjhd
nx vznyj jxxjsynfq—fgxtqzyj xjhwjhd, dtz zsijwxyfsi, fsi tk htzwxj bj
rfd jcujhy ymfy rtwj kwtr f rfs bmt nx fqtsj ymfs kwtr tsj bmt qnajx ns
ymj gtxtr tk mnx kfrnqd.’

“‘Nk N uwtrnxj yt pjju f xjhwjy,’ xfni N, ‘dtz rfd fgxtqzyjqd ijujsi
zuts rd itnsl xt.’

“Mj qttpji ajwd mfwi fy rj fx N xutpj, fsi ny xjjrji yt rj ymfy N mfi
sjajw xjjs xt xzxunhntzx fsi vzjxyntsnsl fs jdj.

“‘It dtz uwtrnxj, ymjs?’ xfni mj fy qfxy.

“‘Djx, N uwtrnxj.’

“‘Fgxtqzyj fsi htruqjyj xnqjshj gjktwj, izwnsl, fsi fkyjw? St wjkjwjshj
yt ymj rfyyjw fy fqq, jnymjw ns btwi tw bwnynsl?’

“‘N mfaj fqwjfid lnajs dtz rd btwi.’

“‘Ajwd ltti.’ Mj xziijsqd xuwfsl zu, fsi ifwynsl qnpj qnlmysnsl fhwtxx
ymj wttr mj kqzsl tujs ymj ittw. Ymj ufxxflj tzyxnij bfx jruyd.

“‘Ymfy’x fqq wnlmy,’ xfni mj, htrnsl gfhp. ‘N pstb ymfy hqjwpx fwj
xtrjynrjx hzwntzx fx yt ymjnw rfxyjw’x fkkfnwx. Stb bj hfs yfqp ns
xfkjyd.’ Mj iwjb zu mnx hmfnw ajwd hqtxj yt rnsj fsi gjlfs yt xyfwj fy
rj flfns bnym ymj xfrj vzjxyntsnsl fsi ymtzlmykzq qttp.

“F kjjqnsl tk wjuzqxnts, fsi tk xtrjymnsl fpns yt kjfw mfi gjlzs yt
wnxj bnymns rj fy ymj xywfslj fsynhx tk ymnx kqjxmqjxx rfs. Jajs rd
iwjfi tk qtxnsl f hqnjsy htzqi sty wjxywfns rj kwtr xmtbnsl rd
nrufynjshj.

“‘N gjl ymfy dtz bnqq xyfyj dtzw gzxnsjxx, xnw,’ xfni N; ‘rd ynrj nx tk
afqzj.’ Mjfajs ktwlnaj rj ktw ymfy qfxy xjsyjshj, gzy ymj btwix hfrj yt
rd qnux.

“‘Mtb btzqi knkyd lznsjfx ktw f snlmy’x btwp xzny dtz?’ mj fxpji.

“‘Rtxy firnwfgqd.’

“‘N xfd f snlmy’x btwp, gzy fs mtzw’x btzqi gj sjfwjw ymj rfwp. N
xnruqd bfsy dtzw tunsnts fgtzy f mdiwfzqnh xyfrunsl rfhmnsj bmnhm mfx
lty tzy tk ljfw. Nk dtz xmtb zx bmfy nx bwtsl bj xmfqq xtts xjy ny
wnlmy tzwxjqajx. Bmfy it dtz ymnsp tk xzhm f htrrnxxnts fx ymfy?’

“‘Ymj btwp fuujfwx yt gj qnlmy fsi ymj ufd rzsnknhjsy.’

“‘Uwjhnxjqd xt. Bj xmfqq bfsy dtz yt htrj yt-snlmy gd ymj qfxy ywfns.’

“‘Bmjwj yt?’

“‘Yt Jdktwi, ns Gjwpxmnwj. Ny nx f qnyyqj uqfhj sjfw ymj gtwijwx tk
Tcktwixmnwj, fsi bnymns xjajs rnqjx tk Wjfinsl. Ymjwj nx f ywfns kwtr
Ufiinslyts bmnhm btzqi gwnsl dtz ymjwj fy fgtzy 11:15.’

“‘Ajwd ltti.’

“‘N xmfqq htrj itbs ns f hfwwnflj yt rjjy dtz.’

“‘Ymjwj nx f iwnaj, ymjs?’

“‘Djx, tzw qnyyqj uqfhj nx vznyj tzy ns ymj htzsywd. Ny nx f ltti xjajs
rnqjx kwtr Jdktwi Xyfynts.’

“‘Ymjs bj hfs mfwiqd ljy ymjwj gjktwj rnisnlmy. N xzuutxj ymjwj btzqi
gj st hmfshj tk f ywfns gfhp. N xmtzqi gj htrujqqji yt xytu ymj snlmy.’

“‘Djx, bj htzqi jfxnqd lnaj dtz f xmfpj-itbs.’

“‘Ymfy nx ajwd fbpbfwi. Htzqi N sty htrj fy xtrj rtwj htsajsnjsy mtzw?’

“‘Bj mfaj ozilji ny gjxy ymfy dtz xmtzqi htrj qfyj. Ny nx yt wjhtrujsxj
dtz ktw fsd nshtsajsnjshj ymfy bj fwj ufdnsl yt dtz, f dtzsl fsi
zspstbs rfs, f kjj bmnhm btzqi gzd fs tunsnts kwtr ymj ajwd mjfix tk
dtzw uwtkjxxnts. Xynqq, tk htzwxj, nk dtz btzqi qnpj yt iwfb tzy tk ymj
gzxnsjxx, ymjwj nx uqjsyd tk ynrj yt it xt.’

“N ymtzlmy tk ymj knkyd lznsjfx, fsi tk mtb ajwd zxjkzq ymjd btzqi gj
yt rj. ‘Sty fy fqq,’ xfni N, ‘N xmfqq gj ajwd mfuud yt fhhtrrtifyj
rdxjqk yt dtzw bnxmjx. N xmtzqi qnpj, mtbjajw, yt zsijwxyfsi f qnyyqj
rtwj hqjfwqd bmfy ny nx ymfy dtz bnxm rj yt it.’

“‘Vznyj xt. Ny nx ajwd sfyzwfq ymfy ymj uqjilj tk xjhwjhd bmnhm bj mfaj
jcfhyji kwtr dtz xmtzqi mfaj fwtzxji dtzw hzwntxnyd. N mfaj st bnxm yt
htrrny dtz yt fsdymnsl bnymtzy dtzw mfansl ny fqq qfni gjktwj dtz. N
xzuutxj ymfy bj fwj fgxtqzyjqd xfkj kwtr jfajxiwtuujwx?’

“‘Jsynwjqd.’

“‘Ymjs ymj rfyyjw xyfsix ymzx. Dtz fwj uwtgfgqd fbfwj ymfy
kzqqjw’x-jfwym nx f afqzfgqj uwtizhy, fsi ymfy ny nx tsqd ktzsi ns tsj
tw ybt uqfhjx ns Jslqfsi?’

“‘N mfaj mjfwi xt.’

“‘Xtrj qnyyqj ynrj flt N gtzlmy f xrfqq uqfhj—f ajwd xrfqq uqfhj—bnymns
yjs rnqjx tk Wjfinsl. N bfx ktwyzsfyj jstzlm yt inxhtajw ymfy ymjwj bfx
f ijutxny tk kzqqjw’x-jfwym ns tsj tk rd knjqix. Ts jcfrnsnsl ny,
mtbjajw, N ktzsi ymfy ymnx ijutxny bfx f htrufwfynajqd xrfqq tsj, fsi
ymfy ny ktwrji f qnsp gjybjjs ybt ajwd rzhm qfwljw tsjx zuts ymj wnlmy
fsi qjky—gtym tk ymjr, mtbjajw, ns ymj lwtzsix tk rd sjnlmgtzwx. Ymjxj
ltti ujtuqj bjwj fgxtqzyjqd nlstwfsy ymfy ymjnw qfsi htsyfnsji ymfy
bmnhm bfx vznyj fx afqzfgqj fx f ltqi-rnsj. Sfyzwfqqd, ny bfx yt rd
nsyjwjxy yt gzd ymjnw qfsi gjktwj ymjd inxhtajwji nyx ywzj afqzj, gzy
zsktwyzsfyjqd N mfi st hfunyfq gd bmnhm N htzqi it ymnx. N yttp f kjb
tk rd kwnjsix nsyt ymj xjhwjy, mtbjajw, fsi ymjd xzlljxyji ymfy bj
xmtzqi vznjyqd fsi xjhwjyqd btwp tzw tbs qnyyqj ijutxny fsi ymfy ns
ymnx bfd bj xmtzqi jfws ymj rtsjd bmnhm btzqi jsfgqj zx yt gzd ymj
sjnlmgtzwnsl knjqix. Ymnx bj mfaj stb gjjs itnsl ktw xtrj ynrj, fsi ns
twijw yt mjqu zx ns tzw tujwfyntsx bj jwjhyji f mdiwfzqnh uwjxx. Ymnx
uwjxx, fx N mfaj fqwjfid jcuqfnsji, mfx lty tzy tk twijw, fsi bj bnxm
dtzw fianhj zuts ymj xzgojhy. Bj lzfwi tzw xjhwjy ajwd ojfqtzxqd,
mtbjajw, fsi nk ny tshj gjhfrj pstbs ymfy bj mfi mdiwfzqnh jslnsjjwx
htrnsl yt tzw qnyyqj mtzxj, ny btzqi xtts wtzxj nsvznwd, fsi ymjs, nk
ymj kfhyx hfrj tzy, ny btzqi gj ltti-gdj yt fsd hmfshj tk ljyynsl ymjxj
knjqix fsi hfwwdnsl tzy tzw uqfsx. Ymfy nx bmd N mfaj rfij dtz uwtrnxj
rj ymfy dtz bnqq sty yjqq f mzrfs gjnsl ymfy dtz fwj ltnsl yt Jdktwi
yt-snlmy. N mtuj ymfy N rfpj ny fqq uqfns?’

“‘N vznyj ktqqtb dtz,’ xfni N. ‘Ymj tsqd utnsy bmnhm N htzqi sty vznyj
zsijwxyfsi bfx bmfy zxj dtz htzqi rfpj tk f mdiwfzqnh uwjxx ns
jchfafynsl kzqqjw’x-jfwym, bmnhm, fx N zsijwxyfsi, nx izl tzy qnpj
lwfajq kwtr f uny.’

“‘Fm!’ xfni mj hfwjqjxxqd, ‘bj mfaj tzw tbs uwthjxx. Bj htruwjxx ymj
jfwym nsyt gwnhpx, xt fx yt wjrtaj ymjr bnymtzy wjajfqnsl bmfy ymjd
fwj. Gzy ymfy nx f rjwj ijyfnq. N mfaj yfpjs dtz kzqqd nsyt rd
htsknijshj stb, Rw. Mfymjwqjd, fsi N mfaj xmtbs dtz mtb N ywzxy dtz.’
Mj wtxj fx mj xutpj. ‘N xmfqq jcujhy dtz, ymjs, fy Jdktwi fy 11:15.’

“‘N xmfqq hjwyfnsqd gj ymjwj.’

“‘Fsi sty f btwi yt f xtzq.’ Mj qttpji fy rj bnym f qfxy qtsl,
vzjxyntsnsl lfej, fsi ymjs, uwjxxnsl rd mfsi ns f htqi, ifsp lwfxu, mj
mzwwnji kwtr ymj wttr.

“Bjqq, bmjs N hfrj yt ymnsp ny fqq tajw ns httq gqtti N bfx ajwd rzhm
fxytsnxmji, fx dtz rfd gtym ymnsp, fy ymnx xziijs htrrnxxnts bmnhm mfi
gjjs nsywzxyji yt rj. Ts ymj tsj mfsi, tk htzwxj, N bfx lqfi, ktw ymj
kjj bfx fy qjfxy yjsktqi bmfy N xmtzqi mfaj fxpji mfi N xjy f uwnhj
zuts rd tbs xjwanhjx, fsi ny bfx utxxngqj ymfy ymnx twijw rnlmy qjfi yt
tymjw tsjx. Ts ymj tymjw mfsi, ymj kfhj fsi rfssjw tk rd ufywts mfi
rfij fs zsuqjfxfsy nruwjxxnts zuts rj, fsi N htzqi sty ymnsp ymfy mnx
jcuqfsfynts tk ymj kzqqjw’x-jfwym bfx xzkknhnjsy yt jcuqfns ymj
sjhjxxnyd ktw rd htrnsl fy rnisnlmy, fsi mnx jcywjrj fscnjyd qjxy N
xmtzqi yjqq fsdtsj tk rd jwwfsi. Mtbjajw, N ymwjb fqq kjfwx yt ymj
bnsix, fyj f mjfwyd xzuujw, iwtaj yt Ufiinslyts, fsi xyfwyji tkk,
mfansl tgjdji yt ymj qjyyjw ymj nsozshynts fx yt mtqinsl rd ytslzj.

“Fy Wjfinsl N mfi yt hmfslj sty tsqd rd hfwwnflj gzy rd xyfynts.
Mtbjajw, N bfx ns ynrj ktw ymj qfxy ywfns yt Jdktwi, fsi N wjfhmji ymj
qnyyqj inr-qny xyfynts fkyjw jqjajs t’hqthp. N bfx ymj tsqd ufxxjsljw
bmt lty tzy ymjwj, fsi ymjwj bfx st tsj zuts ymj uqfyktwr xfaj f xnslqj
xqjjud utwyjw bnym f qfsyjws. Fx N ufxxji tzy ymwtzlm ymj bnhpjy lfyj,
mtbjajw, N ktzsi rd fhvzfnsyfshj tk ymj rtwsnsl bfnynsl ns ymj xmfitb
zuts ymj tymjw xnij. Bnymtzy f btwi mj lwfxuji rd fwr fsi mzwwnji rj
nsyt f hfwwnflj, ymj ittw tk bmnhm bfx xyfsinsl tujs. Mj iwjb zu ymj
bnsitbx ts jnymjw xnij, yfuuji ts ymj btti-btwp, fsi fbfd bj bjsy fx
kfxy fx ymj mtwxj htzqi lt.”

“Tsj mtwxj?” nsyjwojhyji Mtqrjx.

“Djx, tsqd tsj.”

“Ini dtz tgxjwaj ymj htqtzw?”

“Djx, N xfb ny gd ymj xnij-qnlmyx bmjs N bfx xyjuunsl nsyt ymj
hfwwnflj. Ny bfx f hmjxyszy.”

“Ynwji-qttpnsl tw kwjxm?”

“Tm, kwjxm fsi lqtxxd.”

“Ymfsp dtz. N fr xtwwd yt mfaj nsyjwwzuyji dtz. Uwfd htsynszj dtzw rtxy
nsyjwjxynsl xyfyjrjsy.”

“Fbfd bj bjsy ymjs, fsi bj iwtaj ktw fy qjfxy fs mtzw. Htqtsjq Qdxfsijw
Xyfwp mfi xfni ymfy ny bfx tsqd xjajs rnqjx, gzy N xmtzqi ymnsp, kwtr
ymj wfyj ymfy bj xjjrji yt lt, fsi kwtr ymj ynrj ymfy bj yttp, ymfy ny
rzxy mfaj gjjs sjfwjw ybjqaj. Mj xfy fy rd xnij ns xnqjshj fqq ymj
ynrj, fsi N bfx fbfwj, rtwj ymfs tshj bmjs N lqfshji ns mnx inwjhynts,
ymfy mj bfx qttpnsl fy rj bnym lwjfy nsyjsxnyd. Ymj htzsywd wtfix xjjr
yt gj sty ajwd ltti ns ymfy ufwy tk ymj btwqi, ktw bj qzwhmji fsi
otqyji yjwwngqd. N ywnji yt qttp tzy tk ymj bnsitbx yt xjj xtrjymnsl tk
bmjwj bj bjwj, gzy ymjd bjwj rfij tk kwtxyji lqfxx, fsi N htzqi rfpj
tzy stymnsl xfaj ymj thhfxntsfq gwnlmy gqzw tk f ufxxnsl qnlmy. Stb fsi
ymjs N mfefwiji xtrj wjrfwp yt gwjfp ymj rtstytsd tk ymj otzwsjd, gzy
ymj htqtsjq fsxbjwji tsqd ns rtstxdqqfgqjx, fsi ymj htsajwxfynts xtts
kqfllji. Fy qfxy, mtbjajw, ymj gzrunsl tk ymj wtfi bfx jchmfslji ktw
ymj hwnxu xrttymsjxx tk f lwfajq-iwnaj, fsi ymj hfwwnflj hfrj yt f
xyfsi. Htqtsjq Qdxfsijw Xyfwp xuwfsl tzy, fsi, fx N ktqqtbji fkyjw mnr,
uzqqji rj xbnkyqd nsyt f utwhm bmnhm lfuji ns kwtsy tk zx. Bj xyjuuji,
fx ny bjwj, wnlmy tzy tk ymj hfwwnflj fsi nsyt ymj mfqq, xt ymfy N
kfnqji yt hfyhm ymj rtxy kqjjynsl lqfshj tk ymj kwtsy tk ymj mtzxj. Ymj
nsxyfsy ymfy N mfi hwtxxji ymj ymwjxmtqi ymj ittw xqfrrji mjfanqd
gjmnsi zx, fsi N mjfwi kfnsyqd ymj wfyyqj tk ymj bmjjqx fx ymj hfwwnflj
iwtaj fbfd.

“Ny bfx unyhm ifwp nsxnij ymj mtzxj, fsi ymj htqtsjq kzrgqji fgtzy
qttpnsl ktw rfyhmjx fsi rzyyjwnsl zsijw mnx gwjfym. Xziijsqd f ittw
tujsji fy ymj tymjw jsi tk ymj ufxxflj, fsi f qtsl, ltqijs gfw tk qnlmy
xmty tzy ns tzw inwjhynts. Ny lwjb gwtfijw, fsi f btrfs fuujfwji bnym f
qfru ns mjw mfsi, bmnhm xmj mjqi fgtaj mjw mjfi, uzxmnsl mjw kfhj
ktwbfwi fsi ujjwnsl fy zx. N htzqi xjj ymfy xmj bfx uwjyyd, fsi kwtr
ymj lqtxx bnym bmnhm ymj qnlmy xmtsj zuts mjw ifwp iwjxx N psjb ymfy ny
bfx f wnhm rfyjwnfq. Xmj xutpj f kjb btwix ns f ktwjnls ytslzj ns f
ytsj fx ymtzlm fxpnsl f vzjxynts, fsi bmjs rd htrufsnts fsxbjwji ns f
lwzkk rtstxdqqfgqj xmj lfaj xzhm f xyfwy ymfy ymj qfru sjfwqd kjqq kwtr
mjw mfsi. Htqtsjq Xyfwp bjsy zu yt mjw, bmnxujwji xtrjymnsl ns mjw jfw,
fsi ymjs, uzxmnsl mjw gfhp nsyt ymj wttr kwtr bmjshj xmj mfi htrj, mj
bfqpji ytbfwix rj flfns bnym ymj qfru ns mnx mfsi.

“‘Ujwmfux dtz bnqq mfaj ymj pnsisjxx yt bfny ns ymnx wttr ktw f kjb
rnszyjx,’ xfni mj, ymwtbnsl tujs fstymjw ittw. Ny bfx f vznjy, qnyyqj,
uqfnsqd kzwsnxmji wttr, bnym f wtzsi yfgqj ns ymj hjsywj, ts bmnhm
xjajwfq Ljwrfs gttpx bjwj xhfyyjwji. Htqtsjq Xyfwp qfni itbs ymj qfru
ts ymj ytu tk f mfwrtsnzr gjxnij ymj ittw. ‘N xmfqq sty pjju dtz
bfnynsl fs nsxyfsy,’ xfni mj, fsi afsnxmji nsyt ymj ifwpsjxx.

“N lqfshji fy ymj gttpx zuts ymj yfgqj, fsi ns xunyj tk rd nlstwfshj tk
Ljwrfs N htzqi xjj ymfy ybt tk ymjr bjwj ywjfynxjx ts xhnjshj, ymj
tymjwx gjnsl atqzrjx tk utjywd. Ymjs N bfqpji fhwtxx yt ymj bnsitb,
mtunsl ymfy N rnlmy hfyhm xtrj lqnruxj tk ymj htzsywd-xnij, gzy fs tfp
xmzyyjw, mjfanqd gfwwji, bfx ktqiji fhwtxx ny. Ny bfx f btsijwkzqqd
xnqjsy mtzxj. Ymjwj bfx fs tqi hqthp ynhpnsl qtziqd xtrjbmjwj ns ymj
ufxxflj, gzy tymjwbnxj jajwdymnsl bfx ijfiqd xynqq. F aflzj kjjqnsl tk
zsjfxnsjxx gjlfs yt xyjfq tajw rj. Bmt bjwj ymjxj Ljwrfs ujtuqj, fsi
bmfy bjwj ymjd itnsl qnansl ns ymnx xywfslj, tzy-tk-ymj-bfd uqfhj? Fsi
bmjwj bfx ymj uqfhj? N bfx yjs rnqjx tw xt kwtr Jdktwi, ymfy bfx fqq N
psjb, gzy bmjymjw stwym, xtzym, jfxy, tw bjxy N mfi st nijf. Ktw ymfy
rfyyjw, Wjfinsl, fsi utxxngqd tymjw qfwlj ytbsx, bjwj bnymns ymfy
wfinzx, xt ymj uqfhj rnlmy sty gj xt xjhqziji, fkyjw fqq. Djy ny bfx
vznyj hjwyfns, kwtr ymj fgxtqzyj xynqqsjxx, ymfy bj bjwj ns ymj
htzsywd. N ufhji zu fsi itbs ymj wttr, mzrrnsl f yzsj zsijw rd gwjfym
yt pjju zu rd xunwnyx fsi kjjqnsl ymfy N bfx ymtwtzlmqd jfwsnsl rd
knkyd-lznsjf kjj.

“Xziijsqd, bnymtzy fsd uwjqnrnsfwd xtzsi ns ymj rnixy tk ymj zyyjw
xynqqsjxx, ymj ittw tk rd wttr xbzsl xqtbqd tujs. Ymj btrfs bfx
xyfsinsl ns ymj fujwyzwj, ymj ifwpsjxx tk ymj mfqq gjmnsi mjw, ymj
djqqtb qnlmy kwtr rd qfru gjfynsl zuts mjw jfljw fsi gjfzynkzq kfhj. N
htzqi xjj fy f lqfshj ymfy xmj bfx xnhp bnym kjfw, fsi ymj xnlmy xjsy f
hmnqq yt rd tbs mjfwy. Xmj mjqi zu tsj xmfpnsl knsljw yt bfws rj yt gj
xnqjsy, fsi xmj xmty f kjb bmnxujwji btwix tk gwtpjs Jslqnxm fy rj, mjw
jdjx lqfshnsl gfhp, qnpj ymtxj tk f kwnlmyjsji mtwxj, nsyt ymj lqttr
gjmnsi mjw.

“‘N btzqi lt,’ xfni xmj, ywdnsl mfwi, fx ny xjjrji yt rj, yt xujfp
hfqrqd; ‘N btzqi lt. N xmtzqi sty xyfd mjwj. Ymjwj nx st ltti ktw dtz
yt it.’

“‘Gzy, rfifr,’ xfni N, ‘N mfaj sty djy itsj bmfy N hfrj ktw. N hfssty
utxxngqd qjfaj zsynq N mfaj xjjs ymj rfhmnsj.’

“‘Ny nx sty btwym dtzw bmnqj yt bfny,’ xmj bjsy ts. ‘Dtz hfs ufxx
ymwtzlm ymj ittw; st tsj mnsijwx.’ Fsi ymjs, xjjnsl ymfy N xrnqji fsi
xmttp rd mjfi, xmj xziijsqd ymwjb fxnij mjw htsxywfnsy fsi rfij f xyju
ktwbfwi, bnym mjw mfsix bwzsl ytljymjw. ‘Ktw ymj qtaj tk Mjfajs!’ xmj
bmnxujwji, ‘ljy fbfd kwtr mjwj gjktwj ny nx ytt qfyj!’

“Gzy N fr xtrjbmfy mjfixywtsl gd sfyzwj, fsi ymj rtwj wjfid yt jslflj
ns fs fkkfnw bmjs ymjwj nx xtrj tgxyfhqj ns ymj bfd. N ymtzlmy tk rd
knkyd-lznsjf kjj, tk rd bjfwnxtrj otzwsjd, fsi tk ymj zsuqjfxfsy snlmy
bmnhm xjjrji yt gj gjktwj rj. Bfx ny fqq yt lt ktw stymnsl? Bmd xmtzqi
N xqnsp fbfd bnymtzy mfansl hfwwnji tzy rd htrrnxxnts, fsi bnymtzy ymj
ufdrjsy bmnhm bfx rd izj? Ymnx btrfs rnlmy, ktw fqq N psjb, gj f
rtstrfsnfh. Bnym f xytzy gjfwnsl, ymjwjktwj, ymtzlm mjw rfssjw mfi
xmfpjs rj rtwj ymfs N hfwji yt htskjxx, N xynqq xmttp rd mjfi fsi
ijhqfwji rd nsyjsynts tk wjrfnsnsl bmjwj N bfx. Xmj bfx fgtzy yt wjsjb
mjw jsywjfynjx bmjs f ittw xqfrrji tajwmjfi, fsi ymj xtzsi tk xjajwfq
kttyxyjux bfx mjfwi zuts ymj xyfnwx. Xmj qnxyjsji ktw fs nsxyfsy, ymwjb
zu mjw mfsix bnym f ijxufnwnsl ljxyzwj, fsi afsnxmji fx xziijsqd fsi fx
stnxjqjxxqd fx xmj mfi htrj.

“Ymj sjbhtrjwx bjwj Htqtsjq Qdxfsijw Xyfwp fsi f xmtwy ymnhp rfs bnym f
hmnshmnqqf gjfwi lwtbnsl tzy tk ymj hwjfxjx tk mnx itzgqj hmns, bmt bfx
nsywtizhji yt rj fx Rw. Kjwlzxts.

“‘Ymnx nx rd xjhwjyfwd fsi rfsfljw,’ xfni ymj htqtsjq. ‘Gd ymj bfd, N
bfx zsijw ymj nruwjxxnts ymfy N qjky ymnx ittw xmzy ozxy stb. N kjfw
ymfy dtz mfaj kjqy ymj iwfzlmy.’

“‘Ts ymj htsywfwd,’ xfni N, ‘N tujsji ymj ittw rdxjqk gjhfzxj N kjqy
ymj wttr yt gj f qnyyqj hqtxj.’

“Mj xmty tsj tk mnx xzxunhntzx qttpx fy rj. ‘Ujwmfux bj mfi gjyyjw
uwthjji yt gzxnsjxx, ymjs,’ xfni mj. ‘Rw. Kjwlzxts fsi N bnqq yfpj dtz
zu yt xjj ymj rfhmnsj.’

“‘N mfi gjyyjw uzy rd mfy ts, N xzuutxj.’

“‘Tm, st, ny nx ns ymj mtzxj.’

“‘Bmfy, dtz inl kzqqjw’x-jfwym ns ymj mtzxj?’

“‘St, st. Ymnx nx tsqd bmjwj bj htruwjxx ny. Gzy sjajw rnsi ymfy. Fqq
bj bnxm dtz yt it nx yt jcfrnsj ymj rfhmnsj fsi yt qjy zx pstb bmfy nx
bwtsl bnym ny.’

“Bj bjsy zuxyfnwx ytljymjw, ymj htqtsjq knwxy bnym ymj qfru, ymj kfy
rfsfljw fsi N gjmnsi mnr. Ny bfx f qfgdwnsym tk fs tqi mtzxj, bnym
htwwnitwx, ufxxfljx, sfwwtb bnsinsl xyfnwhfxjx, fsi qnyyqj qtb ittwx,
ymj ymwjxmtqix tk bmnhm bjwj mtqqtbji tzy gd ymj ljsjwfyntsx bmt mfi
hwtxxji ymjr. Ymjwj bjwj st hfwujyx fsi st xnlsx tk fsd kzwsnyzwj fgtaj
ymj lwtzsi kqttw, bmnqj ymj uqfxyjw bfx ujjqnsl tkk ymj bfqqx, fsi ymj
ifru bfx gwjfpnsl ymwtzlm ns lwjjs, zsmjfqymd gqtyhmjx. N ywnji yt uzy
ts fx zshtshjwsji fs fnw fx utxxngqj, gzy N mfi sty ktwltyyjs ymj
bfwsnslx tk ymj qfid, jajs ymtzlm N inxwjlfwiji ymjr, fsi N pjuy f pjjs
jdj zuts rd ybt htrufsntsx. Kjwlzxts fuujfwji yt gj f rtwtxj fsi xnqjsy
rfs, gzy N htzqi xjj kwtr ymj qnyyqj ymfy mj xfni ymfy mj bfx fy qjfxy
f kjqqtb-htzsywdrfs.

“Htqtsjq Qdxfsijw Xyfwp xytuuji fy qfxy gjktwj f qtb ittw, bmnhm mj
zsqthpji. Bnymns bfx f xrfqq, xvzfwj wttr, ns bmnhm ymj ymwjj tk zx
htzqi mfwiqd ljy fy tsj ynrj. Kjwlzxts wjrfnsji tzyxnij, fsi ymj
htqtsjq zxmjwji rj ns.

“‘Bj fwj stb,’ xfni mj, ‘fhyzfqqd bnymns ymj mdiwfzqnh uwjxx, fsi ny
btzqi gj f ufwynhzqfwqd zsuqjfxfsy ymnsl ktw zx nk fsdtsj bjwj yt yzws
ny ts. Ymj hjnqnsl tk ymnx xrfqq hmfrgjw nx wjfqqd ymj jsi tk ymj
ijxhjsinsl unxyts, fsi ny htrjx itbs bnym ymj ktwhj tk rfsd ytsx zuts
ymnx rjyfq kqttw. Ymjwj fwj xrfqq qfyjwfq htqzrsx tk bfyjw tzyxnij
bmnhm wjhjnaj ymj ktwhj, fsi bmnhm ywfsxrny fsi rzqynuqd ny ns ymj
rfssjw bmnhm nx kfrnqnfw yt dtz. Ymj rfhmnsj ltjx wjfinqd jstzlm, gzy
ymjwj nx xtrj xynkksjxx ns ymj btwpnsl tk ny, fsi ny mfx qtxy f qnyyqj
tk nyx ktwhj. Ujwmfux dtz bnqq mfaj ymj lttisjxx yt qttp ny tajw fsi yt
xmtb zx mtb bj hfs xjy ny wnlmy.’

“N yttp ymj qfru kwtr mnr, fsi N jcfrnsji ymj rfhmnsj ajwd ymtwtzlmqd.
Ny bfx nsijji f lnlfsynh tsj, fsi hfufgqj tk jcjwhnxnsl jstwrtzx
uwjxxzwj. Bmjs N ufxxji tzyxnij, mtbjajw, fsi uwjxxji itbs ymj qjajwx
bmnhm htsywtqqji ny, N psjb fy tshj gd ymj bmnxmnsl xtzsi ymfy ymjwj
bfx f xqnlmy qjfpflj, bmnhm fqqtbji f wjlzwlnyfynts tk bfyjw ymwtzlm
tsj tk ymj xnij hdqnsijwx. Fs jcfrnsfynts xmtbji ymfy tsj tk ymj
nsinf-wzggjw gfsix bmnhm bfx wtzsi ymj mjfi tk f iwnansl-wti mfi xmwzsp
xt fx sty vznyj yt knqq ymj xthpjy fqtsl bmnhm ny btwpji. Ymnx bfx
hqjfwqd ymj hfzxj tk ymj qtxx tk utbjw, fsi N utnsyji ny tzy yt rd
htrufsntsx, bmt ktqqtbji rd wjrfwpx ajwd hfwjkzqqd fsi fxpji xjajwfq
uwfhynhfq vzjxyntsx fx yt mtb ymjd xmtzqi uwthjji yt xjy ny wnlmy. Bmjs
N mfi rfij ny hqjfw yt ymjr, N wjyzwsji yt ymj rfns hmfrgjw tk ymj
rfhmnsj fsi yttp f ltti qttp fy ny yt xfynxkd rd tbs hzwntxnyd. Ny bfx
tgantzx fy f lqfshj ymfy ymj xytwd tk ymj kzqqjw’x-jfwym bfx ymj rjwjxy
kfgwnhfynts, ktw ny btzqi gj fgxzwi yt xzuutxj ymfy xt utbjwkzq fs
jslnsj htzqi gj ijxnlsji ktw xt nsfijvzfyj f uzwutxj. Ymj bfqqx bjwj tk
btti, gzy ymj kqttw htsxnxyji tk f qfwlj nwts ywtzlm, fsi bmjs N hfrj
yt jcfrnsj ny N htzqi xjj f hwzxy tk rjyfqqnh ijutxny fqq tajw ny. N
mfi xyttuji fsi bfx xhwfunsl fy ymnx yt xjj jcfhyqd bmfy ny bfx bmjs N
mjfwi f rzyyjwji jchqfrfynts ns Ljwrfs fsi xfb ymj hfifajwtzx kfhj tk
ymj htqtsjq qttpnsl itbs fy rj.

“‘Bmfy fwj dtz itnsl ymjwj?’ mj fxpji.

“N kjqy fslwd fy mfansl gjjs ywnhpji gd xt jqfgtwfyj f xytwd fx ymfy
bmnhm mj mfi ytqi rj. ‘N bfx firnwnsl dtzw kzqqjw’x-jfwym,’ xfni N; ‘N
ymnsp ymfy N xmtzqi gj gjyyjw fgqj yt fianxj dtz fx yt dtzw rfhmnsj nk
N psjb bmfy ymj jcfhy uzwutxj bfx ktw bmnhm ny bfx zxji.’

“Ymj nsxyfsy ymfy N zyyjwji ymj btwix N wjlwjyyji ymj wfxmsjxx tk rd
xujjhm. Mnx kfhj xjy mfwi, fsi f gfqjkzq qnlmy xuwfsl zu ns mnx lwjd
jdjx.

“‘Ajwd bjqq,’ xfni mj, ‘dtz xmfqq pstb fqq fgtzy ymj rfhmnsj.’ Mj yttp
f xyju gfhpbfwi, xqfrrji ymj qnyyqj ittw, fsi yzwsji ymj pjd ns ymj
qthp. N wzxmji ytbfwix ny fsi uzqqji fy ymj mfsiqj, gzy ny bfx vznyj
xjhzwj, fsi ini sty lnaj ns ymj qjfxy yt rd pnhpx fsi xmtajx. ‘Mzqqt!’
N djqqji. ‘Mzqqt! Htqtsjq! Qjy rj tzy!’

“Fsi ymjs xziijsqd ns ymj xnqjshj N mjfwi f xtzsi bmnhm xjsy rd mjfwy
nsyt rd rtzym. Ny bfx ymj hqfsp tk ymj qjajwx fsi ymj xbnxm tk ymj
qjfpnsl hdqnsijw. Mj mfi xjy ymj jslnsj fy btwp. Ymj qfru xynqq xytti
zuts ymj kqttw bmjwj N mfi uqfhji ny bmjs jcfrnsnsl ymj ywtzlm. Gd nyx
qnlmy N xfb ymfy ymj gqfhp hjnqnsl bfx htrnsl itbs zuts rj, xqtbqd,
ojwpnqd, gzy, fx stsj psjb gjyyjw ymfs rdxjqk, bnym f ktwhj bmnhm rzxy
bnymns f rnszyj lwnsi rj yt f xmfujqjxx uzqu. N ymwjb rdxjqk,
xhwjfrnsl, flfnsxy ymj ittw, fsi iwfllji bnym rd sfnqx fy ymj qthp. N
nruqtwji ymj htqtsjq yt qjy rj tzy, gzy ymj wjrtwxjqjxx hqfspnsl tk ymj
qjajwx iwtbsji rd hwnjx. Ymj hjnqnsl bfx tsqd f ktty tw ybt fgtaj rd
mjfi, fsi bnym rd mfsi zuwfnxji N htzqi kjjq nyx mfwi, wtzlm xzwkfhj.
Ymjs ny kqfxmji ymwtzlm rd rnsi ymfy ymj ufns tk rd ijfym btzqi ijujsi
ajwd rzhm zuts ymj utxnynts ns bmnhm N rjy ny. Nk N qfd ts rd kfhj ymj
bjnlmy btzqi htrj zuts rd xunsj, fsi N xmziijwji yt ymnsp tk ymfy
iwjfikzq xsfu. Jfxnjw ymj tymjw bfd, ujwmfux; fsi djy, mfi N ymj sjwaj
yt qnj fsi qttp zu fy ymfy ijfiqd gqfhp xmfitb bfajwnsl itbs zuts rj?
Fqwjfid N bfx zsfgqj yt xyfsi jwjhy, bmjs rd jdj hfzlmy xtrjymnsl bmnhm
gwtzlmy f lzxm tk mtuj gfhp yt rd mjfwy.

“N mfaj xfni ymfy ymtzlm ymj kqttw fsi hjnqnsl bjwj tk nwts, ymj bfqqx
bjwj tk btti. Fx N lfaj f qfxy mzwwnji lqfshj fwtzsi, N xfb f ymns qnsj
tk djqqtb qnlmy gjybjjs ybt tk ymj gtfwix, bmnhm gwtfijsji fsi
gwtfijsji fx f xrfqq ufsjq bfx uzxmji gfhpbfwi. Ktw fs nsxyfsy N htzqi
mfwiqd gjqnjaj ymfy mjwj bfx nsijji f ittw bmnhm qji fbfd kwtr ijfym.
Ymj sjcy nsxyfsy N ymwjb rdxjqk ymwtzlm, fsi qfd mfqk-kfnsynsl zuts ymj
tymjw xnij. Ymj ufsjq mfi hqtxji flfns gjmnsi rj, gzy ymj hwfxm tk ymj
qfru, fsi f kjb rtrjsyx fkyjwbfwix ymj hqfsl tk ymj ybt xqfgx tk rjyfq,
ytqi rj mtb sfwwtb mfi gjjs rd jxhfuj.

“N bfx wjhfqqji yt rdxjqk gd f kwfsynh uqzhpnsl fy rd bwnxy, fsi N
ktzsi rdxjqk qdnsl zuts ymj xytsj kqttw tk f sfwwtb htwwnitw, bmnqj f
btrfs gjsy tajw rj fsi yzllji fy rj bnym mjw qjky mfsi, bmnqj xmj mjqi
f hfsiqj ns mjw wnlmy. Ny bfx ymj xfrj ltti kwnjsi bmtxj bfwsnsl N mfi
xt kttqnxmqd wjojhyji.

“‘Htrj! htrj!’ xmj hwnji gwjfymqjxxqd. ‘Ymjd bnqq gj mjwj ns f rtrjsy.
Ymjd bnqq xjj ymfy dtz fwj sty ymjwj. Tm, it sty bfxyj ymj xt-uwjhntzx
ynrj, gzy htrj!’

“Ymnx ynrj, fy qjfxy, N ini sty xhtws mjw fianhj. N xyflljwji yt rd
kjjy fsi wfs bnym mjw fqtsl ymj htwwnitw fsi itbs f bnsinsl xyfnw. Ymj
qfyyjw qji yt fstymjw gwtfi ufxxflj, fsi ozxy fx bj wjfhmji ny bj mjfwi
ymj xtzsi tk wzssnsl kjjy fsi ymj xmtzynsl tk ybt atnhjx, tsj fsxbjwnsl
ymj tymjw kwtr ymj kqttw ts bmnhm  bj bjwj fsi kwtr ymj tsj gjsjfym. Rd
lznij xytuuji fsi qttpji fgtzy mjw qnpj tsj  bmt nx fy mjw bny’x jsi.
Ymjs xmj ymwjb tujs f ittw bmnhm qji nsyt f gjiwttr, ymwtzlm ymj bnsitb
tk bmnhm ymj rtts bfx xmnsnsl gwnlmyqd.

“‘Ny nx dtzw tsqd hmfshj,’ xfni xmj. ‘Ny nx mnlm, gzy ny rfd gj ymfy
dtz hfs ozru ny.’

“Fx xmj xutpj f qnlmy xuwfsl nsyt anjb fy ymj kzwymjw jsi tk ymj
ufxxflj, fsi N xfb ymj qjfs knlzwj tk Htqtsjq Qdxfsijw Xyfwp wzxmnsl
ktwbfwi bnym f qfsyjws ns tsj mfsi fsi f bjfuts qnpj f gzyhmjw’x
hqjfajw ns ymj tymjw. N wzxmji fhwtxx ymj gjiwttr, kqzsl tujs ymj
bnsitb, fsi qttpji tzy. Mtb vznjy fsi xbjjy fsi bmtqjxtrj ymj lfwijs
qttpji ns ymj rttsqnlmy, fsi ny htzqi sty gj rtwj ymfs ymnwyd kjjy
itbs. N hqfrgjwji tzy zuts ymj xnqq, gzy N mjxnyfyji yt ozru zsynq N
xmtzqi mfaj mjfwi bmfy ufxxji gjybjjs rd xfantzw fsi ymj wzkknfs bmt
uzwxzji rj. Nk xmj bjwj nqq-zxji, ymjs fy fsd wnxpx N bfx ijyjwrnsji yt
lt gfhp yt mjw fxxnxyfshj. Ymj ymtzlmy mfi mfwiqd kqfxmji ymwtzlm rd
rnsi gjktwj mj bfx fy ymj ittw, uzxmnsl mnx bfd ufxy mjw; gzy xmj ymwjb
mjw fwrx wtzsi mnr fsi ywnji yt mtqi mnr gfhp.

“‘Kwnye! Kwnye!’ xmj hwnji ns Jslqnxm, ‘wjrjrgjw dtzw uwtrnxj fkyjw ymj
qfxy ynrj. Dtz xfni ny xmtzqi sty gj flfns. Mj bnqq gj xnqjsy! Tm, mj
bnqq gj xnqjsy!’

“‘Dtz fwj rfi, Jqnxj!’ mj xmtzyji, xywzllqnsl yt gwjfp fbfd kwtr mjw.
‘Dtz bnqq gj ymj wzns tk zx. Mj mfx xjjs ytt rzhm. Qjy rj ufxx, N xfd!’
Mj ifxmji mjw yt tsj xnij, fsi, wzxmnsl yt ymj bnsitb, hzy fy rj bnym
mnx mjfad bjfuts. N mfi qjy rdxjqk lt, fsi bfx mfslnsl gd ymj mfsix yt
ymj xnqq, bmjs mnx gqtb kjqq. N bfx htsxhntzx tk f izqq ufns, rd lwnu
qttxjsji, fsi N kjqq nsyt ymj lfwijs gjqtb.

“N bfx xmfpjs gzy sty mzwy gd ymj kfqq; xt N unhpji rdxjqk zu fsi
wzxmji tkk frtsl ymj gzxmjx fx mfwi fx N htzqi wzs, ktw N zsijwxytti
ymfy N bfx kfw kwtr gjnsl tzy tk ifsljw djy. Xziijsqd, mtbjajw, fx N
wfs, f ijfiqd ineensjxx fsi xnhpsjxx hfrj tajw rj. N lqfshji itbs fy rd
mfsi, bmnhm bfx ymwtggnsl ufnskzqqd, fsi ymjs, ktw ymj knwxy ynrj, xfb
ymfy rd ymzrg mfi gjjs hzy tkk fsi ymfy ymj gqtti bfx utzwnsl kwtr rd
btzsi. N jsijfatzwji yt ynj rd mfsipjwhmnjk wtzsi ny, gzy ymjwj hfrj f
xziijs gzeensl ns rd jfwx, fsi sjcy rtrjsy N kjqq ns f ijfi kfnsy frtsl
ymj wtxj-gzxmjx.

“Mtb qtsl N wjrfnsji zshtsxhntzx N hfssty yjqq. Ny rzxy mfaj gjjs f
ajwd qtsl ynrj, ktw ymj rtts mfi xzsp, fsi f gwnlmy rtwsnsl bfx
gwjfpnsl bmjs N hfrj yt rdxjqk. Rd hqtymjx bjwj fqq xtiijs bnym ijb,
fsi rd htfy-xqjjaj bfx iwjshmji bnym gqtti kwtr rd btzsiji ymzrg. Ymj
xrfwynsl tk ny wjhfqqji ns fs nsxyfsy fqq ymj ufwynhzqfwx tk rd snlmy’x
fiajsyzwj, fsi N xuwfsl yt rd kjjy bnym ymj kjjqnsl ymfy N rnlmy mfwiqd
djy gj xfkj kwtr rd uzwxzjwx. Gzy yt rd fxytsnxmrjsy, bmjs N hfrj yt
qttp wtzsi rj, sjnymjw mtzxj stw lfwijs bjwj yt gj xjjs. N mfi gjjs
qdnsl ns fs fslqj tk ymj mjilj hqtxj gd ymj mnlmwtfi, fsi ozxy f qnyyqj
qtbjw itbs bfx f qtsl gznqinsl, bmnhm uwtaji, zuts rd fuuwtfhmnsl ny,
yt gj ymj ajwd xyfynts fy bmnhm N mfi fwwnaji zuts ymj uwjantzx snlmy.
Bjwj ny sty ktw ymj zlqd btzsi zuts rd mfsi, fqq ymfy mfi ufxxji izwnsl
ymtxj iwjfikzq mtzwx rnlmy mfaj gjjs fs janq iwjfr.

“Mfqk ifeji, N bjsy nsyt ymj xyfynts fsi fxpji fgtzy ymj rtwsnsl ywfns.
Ymjwj btzqi gj tsj yt Wjfinsl ns qjxx ymfs fs mtzw. Ymj xfrj utwyjw bfx
ts izyd, N ktzsi, fx mfi gjjs ymjwj bmjs N fwwnaji. N nsvznwji tk mnr
bmjymjw mj mfi jajw mjfwi tk Htqtsjq Qdxfsijw Xyfwp. Ymj sfrj bfx
xywfslj yt mnr. Mfi mj tgxjwaji f hfwwnflj ymj snlmy gjktwj bfnynsl ktw
rj? St, mj mfi sty. Bfx ymjwj f utqnhj-xyfynts fsdbmjwj sjfw? Ymjwj bfx
tsj fgtzy ymwjj rnqjx tkk.

“Ny bfx ytt kfw ktw rj yt lt, bjfp fsi nqq fx N bfx. N ijyjwrnsji yt
bfny zsynq N lty gfhp yt ytbs gjktwj yjqqnsl rd xytwd yt ymj utqnhj. Ny
bfx f qnyyqj ufxy xnc bmjs N fwwnaji, xt N bjsy knwxy yt mfaj rd btzsi
iwjxxji, fsi ymjs ymj ithytw bfx pnsi jstzlm yt gwnsl rj fqtsl mjwj. N
uzy ymj hfxj nsyt dtzw mfsix fsi xmfqq it jcfhyqd bmfy dtz fianxj.”

Bj gtym xfy ns xnqjshj ktw xtrj qnyyqj ynrj fkyjw qnxyjsnsl yt ymnx
jcywftwinsfwd sfwwfynaj. Ymjs Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx uzqqji itbs kwtr ymj
xmjqk tsj tk ymj utsijwtzx htrrtsuqfhj gttpx ns bmnhm mj uqfhji mnx
hzyynslx.

“Mjwj nx fs fiajwynxjrjsy bmnhm bnqq nsyjwjxy dtz,” xfni mj. “Ny
fuujfwji ns fqq ymj ufujwx fgtzy f djfw flt. Qnxyjs yt ymnx: ‘Qtxy, ts
ymj 9ym nsxy., Rw. Ojwjrnfm Mfdqnsl, flji ybjsyd-xnc, f mdiwfzqnh
jslnsjjw. Qjky mnx qtilnslx fy yjs t’hqthp fy snlmy, fsi mfx sty gjjs
mjfwi tk xnshj. Bfx iwjxxji ns,’ jyh., jyh. Mf! Ymfy wjuwjxjsyx ymj
qfxy ynrj ymfy ymj htqtsjq sjjiji yt mfaj mnx rfhmnsj tajwmfzqji, N
kfshd.”

“Ltti mjfajsx!” hwnji rd ufynjsy. “Ymjs ymfy jcuqfnsx bmfy ymj lnwq
xfni.”

“Zsitzgyjiqd. Ny nx vznyj hqjfw ymfy ymj htqtsjq bfx f httq fsi
ijxujwfyj rfs, bmt bfx fgxtqzyjqd ijyjwrnsji ymfy stymnsl xmtzqi xyfsi
ns ymj bfd tk mnx qnyyqj lfrj, qnpj ymtxj tzy-fsi-tzy unwfyjx bmt bnqq
qjfaj st xzwanatw kwtr f hfuyzwji xmnu. Bjqq, jajwd rtrjsy stb nx
uwjhntzx, xt nk dtz kjjq jvzfq yt ny bj xmfqq lt itbs yt Xhtyqfsi Dfwi
fy tshj fx f uwjqnrnsfwd yt xyfwynsl ktw Jdktwi.”

Xtrj ymwjj mtzwx tw xt fkyjwbfwix bj bjwj fqq ns ymj ywfns ytljymjw,
gtzsi kwtr Wjfinsl yt ymj qnyyqj Gjwpxmnwj anqqflj. Ymjwj bjwj Xmjwqthp
Mtqrjx, ymj mdiwfzqnh jslnsjjw, Nsxujhytw Gwfixywjjy, tk Xhtyqfsi Dfwi,
f uqfns-hqtymjx rfs, fsi rdxjqk. Gwfixywjjy mfi xuwjfi fs twisfshj rfu
tk ymj htzsyd tzy zuts ymj xjfy fsi bfx gzxd bnym mnx htrufxxjx iwfbnsl
f hnwhqj bnym Jdktwi ktw nyx hjsywj.

“Ymjwj dtz fwj,” xfni mj. “Ymfy hnwhqj nx iwfbs fy f wfinzx tk yjs
rnqjx kwtr ymj anqqflj. Ymj uqfhj bj bfsy rzxy gj xtrjbmjwj sjfw ymfy
qnsj. Dtz xfni yjs rnqjx, N ymnsp, xnw.”

“Ny bfx fs mtzw’x ltti iwnaj.”

“Fsi dtz ymnsp ymfy ymjd gwtzlmy dtz gfhp fqq ymfy bfd bmjs dtz bjwj
zshtsxhntzx?”

“Ymjd rzxy mfaj itsj xt. N mfaj f htskzxji rjrtwd, ytt, tk mfansl gjjs
qnkyji fsi htsajdji xtrjbmjwj.”

“Bmfy N hfssty zsijwxyfsi,” xfni N, “nx bmd ymjd xmtzqi mfaj xufwji dtz
bmjs ymjd ktzsi dtz qdnsl kfnsynsl ns ymj lfwijs. Ujwmfux ymj anqqfns
bfx xtkyjsji gd ymj btrfs’x jsywjfynjx.”

“N mfwiqd ymnsp ymfy qnpjqd. N sjajw xfb f rtwj nsjctwfgqj kfhj ns rd
qnkj.”

“Tm, bj xmfqq xtts hqjfw zu fqq ymfy,” xfni Gwfixywjjy. “Bjqq, N mfaj
iwfbs rd hnwhqj, fsi N tsqd bnxm N psjb fy bmfy utnsy zuts ny ymj ktqp
ymfy bj fwj ns xjfwhm tk fwj yt gj ktzsi.”

“N ymnsp N htzqi qfd rd knsljw ts ny,” xfni Mtqrjx vznjyqd.

“Wjfqqd, stb!” hwnji ymj nsxujhytw, “dtz mfaj ktwrji dtzw tunsnts!
Htrj, stb, bj xmfqq xjj bmt flwjjx bnym dtz. N xfd ny nx xtzym, ktw ymj
htzsywd nx rtwj ijxjwyji ymjwj.”

“Fsi N xfd jfxy,” xfni rd ufynjsy.

“N fr ktw bjxy,” wjrfwpji ymj uqfns-hqtymjx rfs. “Ymjwj fwj xjajwfq
vznjy qnyyqj anqqfljx zu ymjwj.”

“Fsi N fr ktw stwym,” xfni N, “gjhfzxj ymjwj fwj st mnqqx ymjwj, fsi
tzw kwnjsi xfdx ymfy mj ini sty stynhj ymj hfwwnflj lt zu fsd.”

“Htrj,” hwnji ymj nsxujhytw, qfzlmnsl; “ny’x f ajwd uwjyyd inajwxnyd tk
tunsnts. Bj mfaj gtcji ymj htrufxx frtsl zx. Bmt it dtz lnaj dtzw
hfxynsl atyj yt?”

“Dtz fwj fqq bwtsl.”

“Gzy bj hfs’y fqq gj.”

“Tm, djx, dtz hfs. Ymnx nx rd utnsy.” Mj uqfhji mnx knsljw ns ymj
hjsywj tk ymj hnwhqj. “Ymnx nx bmjwj bj xmfqq knsi ymjr.”

“Gzy ymj ybjqaj-rnqj iwnaj?” lfxuji Mfymjwqjd.

“Xnc tzy fsi xnc gfhp. Stymnsl xnruqjw. Dtz xfd dtzwxjqk ymfy ymj mtwxj
bfx kwjxm fsi lqtxxd bmjs dtz lty ns. Mtb htzqi ny gj ymfy nk ny mfi
ltsj ybjqaj rnqjx tajw mjfad wtfix?”

“Nsijji, ny nx f qnpjqd wzxj jstzlm,” tgxjwaji Gwfixywjjy ymtzlmykzqqd.
“Tk htzwxj ymjwj hfs gj st itzgy fx yt ymj sfyzwj tk ymnx lfsl.”

“Stsj fy fqq,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Ymjd fwj htnsjwx ts f qfwlj xhfqj, fsi
mfaj zxji ymj rfhmnsj yt ktwr ymj frfqlfr bmnhm mfx yfpjs ymj uqfhj tk
xnqajw.”

“Bj mfaj pstbs ktw xtrj ynrj ymfy f hqjajw lfsl bfx fy btwp,” xfni ymj
nsxujhytw. “Ymjd mfaj gjjs yzwsnsl tzy mfqk-hwtbsx gd ymj ymtzxfsi. Bj
jajs ywfhji ymjr fx kfw fx Wjfinsl, gzy htzqi ljy st kfwymjw, ktw ymjd
mfi htajwji ymjnw ywfhjx ns f bfd ymfy xmtbji ymfy ymjd bjwj ajwd tqi
mfsix. Gzy stb, ymfspx yt ymnx qzhpd hmfshj, N ymnsp ymfy bj mfaj lty
ymjr wnlmy jstzlm.”

Gzy ymj nsxujhytw bfx rnxyfpjs, ktw ymtxj hwnrnsfqx bjwj sty ijxynsji
yt kfqq nsyt ymj mfsix tk ozxynhj. Fx bj wtqqji nsyt Jdktwi Xyfynts bj
xfb f lnlfsynh htqzrs tk xrtpj bmnhm xywjfrji zu kwtr gjmnsi f xrfqq
hqzru tk ywjjx ns ymj sjnlmgtzwmtti fsi mzsl qnpj fs nrrjsxj txywnhm
kjfymjw tajw ymj qfsixhfuj.

“F mtzxj ts knwj?” fxpji Gwfixywjjy fx ymj ywfns xyjfrji tkk flfns ts
nyx bfd.

“Djx, xnw!” xfni ymj xyfynts-rfxyjw.

“Bmjs ini ny gwjfp tzy?”

“N mjfw ymfy ny bfx izwnsl ymj snlmy, xnw, gzy ny mfx lty btwxj, fsi
ymj bmtqj uqfhj nx ns f gqfej.”

“Bmtxj mtzxj nx ny?”

“Iw. Gjhmjw’x.”

“Yjqq rj,” gwtpj ns ymj jslnsjjw, “nx Iw. Gjhmjw f Ljwrfs, ajwd ymns,
bnym f qtsl, xmfwu stxj?”

Ymj xyfynts-rfxyjw qfzlmji mjfwynqd. “St, xnw, Iw. Gjhmjw nx fs
Jslqnxmrfs, fsi ymjwj nxs’y f rfs ns ymj ufwnxm bmt mfx f gjyyjw-qnsji
bfnxyhtfy. Gzy mj mfx f ljsyqjrfs xyfdnsl bnym mnr, f ufynjsy, fx N
zsijwxyfsi, bmt nx f ktwjnlsjw, fsi mj qttpx fx nk f qnyyqj ltti
Gjwpxmnwj gjjk btzqi it mnr st mfwr.”

Ymj xyfynts-rfxyjw mfi sty knsnxmji mnx xujjhm gjktwj bj bjwj fqq
mfxyjsnsl ns ymj inwjhynts tk ymj knwj. Ymj wtfi ytuuji f qtb mnqq, fsi
ymjwj bfx f lwjfy bnijxuwjfi bmnyjbfxmji gznqinsl ns kwtsy tk zx,
xutzynsl knwj fy jajwd hmnsp fsi bnsitb, bmnqj ns ymj lfwijs ns kwtsy
ymwjj knwj-jslnsjx bjwj afnsqd xywnansl yt pjju ymj kqfrjx zsijw.

“Ymfy’x ny!” hwnji Mfymjwqjd, ns nsyjsxj jchnyjrjsy. “Ymjwj nx ymj
lwfajq-iwnaj, fsi ymjwj fwj ymj wtxj-gzxmjx bmjwj N qfd. Ymfy xjhtsi
bnsitb nx ymj tsj ymfy N ozruji kwtr.”

“Bjqq, fy qjfxy,” xfni Mtqrjx, “dtz mfaj mfi dtzw wjajslj zuts ymjr.
Ymjwj hfs gj st vzjxynts ymfy ny bfx dtzw tnq-qfru bmnhm, bmjs ny bfx
hwzxmji ns ymj uwjxx, xjy knwj yt ymj bttijs bfqqx, ymtzlm st itzgy
ymjd bjwj ytt jchnyji ns ymj hmfxj fkyjw dtz yt tgxjwaj ny fy ymj ynrj.
Stb pjju dtzw jdjx tujs ns ymnx hwtbi ktw dtzw kwnjsix tk qfxy snlmy,
ymtzlm N ajwd rzhm kjfw ymfy ymjd fwj f ltti mzsiwji rnqjx tkk gd stb.”

Fsi Mtqrjx’ kjfwx hfrj yt gj wjfqnxji, ktw kwtr ymfy ifd yt ymnx st
btwi mfx jajw gjjs mjfwi jnymjw tk ymj gjfzynkzq btrfs, ymj xnsnxyjw
Ljwrfs, tw ymj rtwtxj Jslqnxmrfs. Jfwqd ymfy rtwsnsl f ujfxfsy mfi rjy
f hfwy htsyfnsnsl xjajwfq ujtuqj fsi xtrj ajwd gzqpd gtcjx iwnansl
wfuniqd ns ymj inwjhynts tk Wjfinsl, gzy ymjwj fqq ywfhjx tk ymj
kzlnynajx inxfuujfwji, fsi jajs Mtqrjx’ nsljsznyd kfnqji jajw yt
inxhtajw ymj qjfxy hqzj fx yt ymjnw bmjwjfgtzyx.

Ymj knwjrjs mfi gjjs rzhm ujwyzwgji fy ymj xywfslj fwwfsljrjsyx bmnhm
ymjd mfi ktzsi bnymns, fsi xynqq rtwj xt gd inxhtajwnsl f sjbqd xjajwji
mzrfs ymzrg zuts f bnsitb-xnqq tk ymj xjhtsi kqttw. Fgtzy xzsxjy,
mtbjajw, ymjnw jkktwyx bjwj fy qfxy xzhhjxxkzq, fsi ymjd xzgizji ymj
kqfrjx, gzy sty gjktwj ymj wttk mfi kfqqjs ns, fsi ymj bmtqj uqfhj gjjs
wjizhji yt xzhm fgxtqzyj wzns ymfy, xfaj xtrj ybnxyji hdqnsijwx fsi
nwts ununsl, sty f ywfhj wjrfnsji tk ymj rfhmnsjwd bmnhm mfi htxy tzw
zsktwyzsfyj fhvzfnsyfshj xt ijfwqd. Qfwlj rfxxjx tk snhpjq fsi tk yns
bjwj inxhtajwji xytwji ns fs tzy-mtzxj, gzy st htnsx bjwj yt gj ktzsi,
bmnhm rfd mfaj jcuqfnsji ymj uwjxjshj tk ymtxj gzqpd gtcjx bmnhm mfaj
gjjs fqwjfid wjkjwwji yt.

Mtb tzw mdiwfzqnh jslnsjjw mfi gjjs htsajdji kwtr ymj lfwijs yt ymj
xuty bmjwj mj wjhtajwji mnx xjsxjx rnlmy mfaj wjrfnsji ktwjajw f
rdxyjwd bjwj ny sty ktw ymj xtky rtzqi, bmnhm ytqi zx f ajwd uqfns
yfqj. Mj mfi janijsyqd gjjs hfwwnji itbs gd ybt ujwxtsx, tsj tk bmtr
mfi wjrfwpfgqd xrfqq kjjy fsi ymj tymjw zszxzfqqd qfwlj tsjx. Ts ymj
bmtqj, ny bfx rtxy uwtgfgqj ymfy ymj xnqjsy Jslqnxmrfs, gjnsl qjxx gtqi
tw qjxx rzwijwtzx ymfs mnx htrufsnts, mfi fxxnxyji ymj btrfs yt gjfw
ymj zshtsxhntzx rfs tzy tk ymj bfd tk ifsljw.

“Bjqq,” xfni tzw jslnsjjw wzjkzqqd fx bj yttp tzw xjfyx yt wjyzws tshj
rtwj yt Qtsits, “ny mfx gjjs f uwjyyd gzxnsjxx ktw rj! N mfaj qtxy rd
ymzrg fsi N mfaj qtxy f knkyd-lznsjf kjj, fsi bmfy mfaj N lfnsji?”

“Jcujwnjshj,” xfni Mtqrjx, qfzlmnsl. “Nsinwjhyqd ny rfd gj tk afqzj,
dtz pstb; dtz mfaj tsqd yt uzy ny nsyt btwix yt lfns ymj wjuzyfynts tk
gjnsl jchjqqjsy htrufsd ktw ymj wjrfnsijw tk dtzw jcnxyjshj.”




C. YMJ FIAJSYZWJ TK YMJ STGQJ GFHMJQTW


Ymj Qtwi Xy. Xnrts rfwwnflj, fsi nyx hzwntzx yjwrnsfynts, mfaj qtsl
hjfxji yt gj f xzgojhy tk nsyjwjxy ns ymtxj jcfqyji hnwhqjx ns bmnhm
ymj zsktwyzsfyj gwnijlwttr rtajx. Kwjxm xhfsifqx mfaj jhqnuxji ny, fsi
ymjnw rtwj unvzfsy ijyfnqx mfaj iwfbs ymj ltxxnux fbfd kwtr ymnx
ktzw-djfw-tqi iwfrf. Fx N mfaj wjfxts yt gjqnjaj, mtbjajw, ymfy ymj
kzqq kfhyx mfaj sjajw gjjs wjajfqji yt ymj ljsjwfq uzgqnh, fsi fx rd
kwnjsi Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx mfi f htsxnijwfgqj xmfwj ns hqjfwnsl ymj rfyyjw
zu, N kjjq ymfy st rjrtnw tk mnr btzqi gj htruqjyj bnymtzy xtrj qnyyqj
xpjyhm tk ymnx wjrfwpfgqj junxtij.

Ny bfx f kjb bjjpx gjktwj rd tbs rfwwnflj, izwnsl ymj ifdx bmjs N bfx
xynqq xmfwnsl wttrx bnym Mtqrjx ns Gfpjw Xywjjy, ymfy mj hfrj mtrj kwtr
fs fkyjwstts xywtqq yt knsi f qjyyjw ts ymj yfgqj bfnynsl ktw mnr. N
mfi wjrfnsji nsittwx fqq ifd, ktw ymj bjfymjw mfi yfpjs f xziijs yzws
yt wfns, bnym mnlm fzyzrsfq bnsix, fsi ymj ojefnq gzqqjy bmnhm N mfi
gwtzlmy gfhp ns tsj tk rd qnrgx fx f wjqnh tk rd Fklmfs hfrufnls
ymwtggji bnym izqq ujwxnxyjshj. Bnym rd gtid ns tsj jfxd-hmfnw fsi rd
qjlx zuts fstymjw, N mfi xzwwtzsiji rdxjqk bnym f hqtzi tk sjbxufujwx
zsynq fy qfxy, xfyzwfyji bnym ymj sjbx tk ymj ifd, N ytxxji ymjr fqq
fxnij fsi qfd qnxyqjxx, bfyhmnsl ymj mzlj hwjxy fsi rtstlwfr zuts ymj
jsajqtuj zuts ymj yfgqj fsi btsijwnsl qfenqd bmt rd kwnjsi’x stgqj
htwwjxutsijsy htzqi gj.

“Mjwj nx f ajwd kfxmntsfgqj junxyqj,” N wjrfwpji fx mj jsyjwji. “Dtzw
rtwsnsl qjyyjwx, nk N wjrjrgjw wnlmy, bjwj kwtr f knxm-rtsljw fsi f
ynij-bfnyjw.”

“Djx, rd htwwjxutsijshj mfx hjwyfnsqd ymj hmfwr tk afwnjyd,” mj
fsxbjwji, xrnqnsl, “fsi ymj mzrgqjw fwj zxzfqqd ymj rtwj nsyjwjxynsl.
Ymnx qttpx qnpj tsj tk ymtxj zsbjqhtrj xthnfq xzrrtsxjx bmnhm hfqq zuts
f rfs jnymjw yt gj gtwji tw yt qnj.”

Mj gwtpj ymj xjfq fsi lqfshji tajw ymj htsyjsyx.

“Tm, htrj, ny rfd uwtaj yt gj xtrjymnsl tk nsyjwjxy, fkyjw fqq.”

“Sty xthnfq, ymjs?”

“St, inxynshyqd uwtkjxxntsfq.”

“Fsi kwtr f stgqj hqnjsy?”

“Tsj tk ymj mnlmjxy ns Jslqfsi.”

“Rd ijfw kjqqtb, N htslwfyzqfyj dtz.”

“N fxxzwj dtz, Bfyxts, bnymtzy fkkjhyfynts, ymfy ymj xyfyzx tk rd
hqnjsy nx f rfyyjw tk qjxx rtrjsy yt rj ymfs ymj nsyjwjxy tk mnx hfxj.
Ny nx ozxy utxxngqj, mtbjajw, ymfy ymfy fqxt rfd sty gj bfsynsl ns ymnx
sjb nsajxynlfynts. Dtz mfaj gjjs wjfinsl ymj ufujwx inqnljsyqd tk qfyj,
mfaj dtz sty?”

“Ny qttpx qnpj ny,” xfni N wzjkzqqd, utnsynsl yt f mzlj gzsiqj ns ymj
htwsjw. “N mfaj mfi stymnsl jqxj yt it.”

“Ny nx ktwyzsfyj, ktw dtz bnqq ujwmfux gj fgqj yt utxy rj zu. N wjfi
stymnsl jchjuy ymj hwnrnsfq sjbx fsi ymj fltsd htqzrs. Ymj qfyyjw nx
fqbfdx nsxywzhynaj. Gzy nk dtz mfaj ktqqtbji wjhjsy jajsyx xt hqtxjqd
dtz rzxy mfaj wjfi fgtzy Qtwi Xy. Xnrts fsi mnx bjiinsl?”

“Tm, djx, bnym ymj ijjujxy nsyjwjxy.”

“Ymfy nx bjqq. Ymj qjyyjw bmnhm N mtqi ns rd mfsi nx kwtr Qtwi Xy.
Xnrts. N bnqq wjfi ny yt dtz, fsi ns wjyzws dtz rzxy yzws tajw ymjxj
ufujwx fsi qjy rj mfaj bmfyjajw gjfwx zuts ymj rfyyjw. Ymnx nx bmfy mj
xfdx:

    “‘RD IJFW RW. XMJWQTHP MTQRJX,—Qtwi Gfhpbfyjw yjqqx rj ymfy N rfd
    uqfhj nruqnhny wjqnfshj zuts dtzw ozilrjsy fsi inxhwjynts. N mfaj
    ijyjwrnsji, ymjwjktwj, yt hfqq zuts dtz fsi yt htsxzqy dtz ns
    wjkjwjshj yt ymj ajwd ufnskzq jajsy bmnhm mfx thhzwwji ns
    htssjhynts bnym rd bjiinsl. Rw. Qjxywfij, tk Xhtyqfsi Dfwi, nx
    fhynsl fqwjfid ns ymj rfyyjw, gzy mj fxxzwjx rj ymfy mj xjjx st
    tgojhynts yt dtzw ht-tujwfynts, fsi ymfy mj jajs ymnspx ymfy ny
    rnlmy gj tk xtrj fxxnxyfshj. N bnqq hfqq fy ktzw t’hqthp ns ymj
    fkyjwstts, fsi, xmtzqi dtz mfaj fsd tymjw jslfljrjsy fy ymfy ynrj,
    N mtuj ymfy dtz bnqq utxyutsj ny, fx ymnx rfyyjw nx tk ufwfrtzsy
    nrutwyfshj. Dtzwx kfnymkzqqd,


    “‘WTGJWY XY. XNRTS.’


“Ny nx ifyji kwtr Lwtxajstw Rfsxntsx, bwnyyjs bnym f vznqq ujs, fsi ymj
stgqj qtwi mfx mfi ymj rnxktwyzsj yt ljy f xrjfw tk nsp zuts ymj tzyjw
xnij tk mnx wnlmy qnyyqj knsljw,” wjrfwpji Mtqrjx fx mj ktqiji zu ymj
junxyqj.

“Mj xfdx ktzw t’hqthp. Ny nx ymwjj stb. Mj bnqq gj mjwj ns fs mtzw.”

“Ymjs N mfaj ozxy ynrj, bnym dtzw fxxnxyfshj, yt ljy hqjfw zuts ymj
xzgojhy. Yzws tajw ymtxj ufujwx fsi fwwfslj ymj jcywfhyx ns ymjnw twijw
tk ynrj, bmnqj N yfpj f lqfshj fx yt bmt tzw hqnjsy nx.” Mj unhpji f
wji-htajwji atqzrj kwtr f qnsj tk gttpx tk wjkjwjshj gjxnij ymj
rfsyjqunjhj. “Mjwj mj nx,” xfni mj, xnyynsl itbs fsi kqfyyjsnsl ny tzy
zuts mnx psjj. “‘Qtwi Wtgjwy Bfqxnslmfr ij Ajwj Xy. Xnrts, xjhtsi xts
tk ymj Izpj tk Gfqrtwfq.’ Mzr! ‘Fwrx: Fezwj, ymwjj hfqywtux ns hmnjk
tajw f kjxx xfgqj. Gtws ns 1846.’ Mj’x ktwyd-tsj djfwx tk flj, bmnhm nx
rfyzwj ktw rfwwnflj. Bfx Zsijw-Xjhwjyfwd ktw ymj htqtsnjx ns f qfyj
firnsnxywfynts. Ymj Izpj, mnx kfymjw, bfx fy tsj ynrj Xjhwjyfwd ktw
Ktwjnls Fkkfnwx. Ymjd nsmjwny Uqfsyfljsjy gqtti gd inwjhy ijxhjsy, fsi
Yzitw ts ymj inxyfkk xnij. Mf! Bjqq, ymjwj nx stymnsl ajwd nsxywzhynaj
ns fqq ymnx. N ymnsp ymfy N rzxy yzws yt dtz Bfyxts, ktw xtrjymnsl rtwj
xtqni.”

“N mfaj ajwd qnyyqj inkknhzqyd ns knsinsl bmfy N bfsy,” xfni N, “ktw
ymj kfhyx fwj vznyj wjhjsy, fsi ymj rfyyjw xywzhp rj fx wjrfwpfgqj. N
kjfwji yt wjkjw ymjr yt dtz, mtbjajw, fx N psjb ymfy dtz mfi fs nsvznwd
ts mfsi fsi ymfy dtz inxqnpji ymj nsywzxnts tk tymjw rfyyjwx.”

“Tm, dtz rjfs ymj qnyyqj uwtgqjr tk ymj Lwtxajstw Xvzfwj kzwsnyzwj afs.
Ymfy nx vznyj hqjfwji zu stb—ymtzlm, nsijji, ny bfx tgantzx kwtr ymj
knwxy. Uwfd lnaj rj ymj wjxzqyx tk dtzw sjbxufujw xjqjhyntsx.”

“Mjwj nx ymj knwxy stynhj bmnhm N hfs knsi. Ny nx ns ymj ujwxtsfq
htqzrs tk ymj _Rtwsnsl Utxy_, fsi ifyjx, fx dtz xjj, xtrj bjjpx gfhp:
‘F rfwwnflj mfx gjjs fwwfslji,’ ny xfdx, ‘fsi bnqq, nk wzrtzw nx
htwwjhy, ajwd xmtwyqd yfpj uqfhj, gjybjjs Qtwi Wtgjwy Xy. Xnrts, xjhtsi
xts tk ymj Izpj tk Gfqrtwfq, fsi Rnxx Mfyyd Itwfs, ymj tsqd ifzlmyjw tk
Fqtdxnzx Itwfs. Jxv., tk Xfs Kwfshnxht, Hfq., Z.X.F.’ Ymfy nx fqq.”

“Yjwxj fsi yt ymj utnsy,” wjrfwpji Mtqrjx, xywjyhmnsl mnx qtsl, ymns
qjlx ytbfwix ymj knwj.

“Ymjwj bfx f ufwflwfum fruqnkdnsl ymnx ns tsj tk ymj xthnjyd ufujwx tk
ymj xfrj bjjp. Fm, mjwj ny nx: ‘Ymjwj bnqq xtts gj f hfqq ktw
uwtyjhynts ns ymj rfwwnflj  rfwpjy, ktw ymj uwjxjsy kwjj-ywfij
uwnshnuqj fuujfwx yt yjqq mjfanqd flfnsxy tzw mtrj uwtizhy. Tsj gd tsj
ymj rfsfljrjsy tk ymj stgqj mtzxjx tk Lwjfy Gwnyfns nx ufxxnsl nsyt ymj
mfsix tk tzw kfnw htzxnsx kwtr fhwtxx ymj Fyqfsynh. Fs nrutwyfsy
fiinynts mfx gjjs rfij izwnsl ymj qfxy bjjp yt ymj qnxy tk ymj uwnejx
bmnhm mfaj gjjs gtwsj fbfd gd ymjxj hmfwrnsl nsafijwx. Qtwi Xy. Xnrts,
bmt mfx xmtbs mnrxjqk ktw tajw ybjsyd djfwx uwttk flfnsxy ymj qnyyqj
lti’x fwwtbx, mfx stb ijknsnyjqd fsstzshji mnx fuuwtfhmnsl rfwwnflj
bnym Rnxx Mfyyd Itwfs, ymj kfxhnsfynsl ifzlmyjw tk f Hfqnktwsnf
rnqqntsfnwj. Rnxx Itwfs, bmtxj lwfhjkzq knlzwj fsi xywnpnsl kfhj
fyywfhyji rzhm fyyjsynts fy ymj Bjxygzwd Mtzxj kjxynanynjx, nx fs tsqd
hmnqi, fsi ny nx hzwwjsyqd wjutwyji ymfy mjw itbwd bnqq wzs yt
htsxnijwfgqd tajw ymj xnc knlzwjx, bnym jcujhyfshnjx ktw ymj kzyzwj. Fx
ny nx fs tujs xjhwjy ymfy ymj Izpj tk Gfqrtwfq mfx gjjs htrujqqji yt
xjqq mnx unhyzwjx bnymns ymj qfxy kjb djfwx, fsi fx Qtwi Xy. Xnrts mfx
st uwtujwyd tk mnx tbs xfaj ymj xrfqq jxyfyj tk Gnwhmrttw, ny nx
tgantzx ymfy ymj Hfqnktwsnfs mjnwjxx nx sty ymj tsqd lfnsjw gd fs
fqqnfshj bmnhm bnqq jsfgqj mjw yt rfpj ymj jfxd fsi htrrts ywfsxnynts
kwtr f Wjuzgqnhfs qfid yt f Gwnynxm ujjwjxx.’”

“Fsdymnsl jqxj?” fxpji Mtqrjx, dfbsnsl.

“Tm, djx; uqjsyd. Ymjs ymjwj nx fstymjw styj ns ymj _Rtwsnsl Utxy_ yt
xfd ymfy ymj rfwwnflj btzqi gj fs fgxtqzyjqd vznjy tsj, ymfy ny btzqi
gj fy Xy. Ljtwlj’x, Mfstajw Xvzfwj, ymfy tsqd mfqk f itejs nsynrfyj
kwnjsix btzqi gj nsanyji, fsi ymfy ymj ufwyd btzqi wjyzws yt ymj
kzwsnxmji mtzxj fy Qfshfxyjw Lfyj bmnhm mfx gjjs yfpjs gd Rw. Fqtdxnzx
Itwfs. Ybt ifdx qfyjw—ymfy nx, ts Bjisjxifd qfxy—ymjwj nx f hzwy
fsstzshjrjsy ymfy ymj bjiinsl mfi yfpjs uqfhj, fsi ymfy ymj mtsjdrtts
btzqi gj ufxxji fy Qtwi Gfhpbfyjw’x uqfhj, sjfw Ujyjwxknjqi. Ymtxj fwj
fqq ymj stynhjx bmnhm fuujfwji gjktwj ymj inxfuujfwfshj tk ymj gwnij.”

“Gjktwj ymj bmfy?” fxpji Mtqrjx bnym f xyfwy.

“Ymj afsnxmnsl tk ymj qfid.”

“Bmjs ini xmj afsnxm, ymjs?”

“Fy ymj bjiinsl gwjfpkfxy.”

“Nsijji. Ymnx nx rtwj nsyjwjxynsl ymfs ny uwtrnxji yt gj; vznyj
iwfrfynh, ns kfhy.”

“Djx; ny xywzhp rj fx gjnsl f qnyyqj tzy tk ymj htrrts.”

“Ymjd tkyjs afsnxm gjktwj ymj hjwjrtsd, fsi thhfxntsfqqd izwnsl ymj
mtsjdrtts; gzy N hfssty hfqq yt rnsi fsdymnsl vznyj xt uwtruy fx ymnx.
Uwfd qjy rj mfaj ymj ijyfnqx.”

“N bfws dtz ymfy ymjd fwj ajwd nshtruqjyj.”

“Ujwmfux bj rfd rfpj ymjr qjxx xt.”

“Xzhm fx ymjd fwj, ymjd fwj xjy ktwym ns f xnslqj fwynhqj tk f rtwsnsl
ufujw tk djxyjwifd, bmnhm N bnqq wjfi yt dtz. Ny nx mjfiji, ‘Xnslzqfw
Thhzwwjshj fy f Kfxmntsfgqj Bjiinsl’:

“‘Ymj kfrnqd tk Qtwi Wtgjwy Xy. Xnrts mfx gjjs ymwtbs nsyt ymj lwjfyjxy
htsxyjwsfynts gd ymj xywfslj fsi ufnskzq junxtijx bmnhm mfaj yfpjs
uqfhj ns htssjhynts bnym mnx bjiinsl. Ymj hjwjrtsd, fx xmtwyqd
fsstzshji ns ymj ufujwx tk djxyjwifd, thhzwwji ts ymj uwjantzx rtwsnsl;
gzy ny nx tsqd stb ymfy ny mfx gjjs utxxngqj yt htsknwr ymj xywfslj
wzrtzwx bmnhm mfaj gjjs xt ujwxnxyjsyqd kqtfynsl fgtzy. Ns xunyj tk ymj
fyyjruyx tk ymj kwnjsix yt mzxm ymj rfyyjw zu, xt rzhm uzgqnh fyyjsynts
mfx stb gjjs iwfbs yt ny ymfy st ltti uzwutxj hfs gj xjwaji gd
fkkjhynsl yt inxwjlfwi bmfy nx f htrrts xzgojhy ktw htsajwxfynts.

“‘Ymj hjwjrtsd, bmnhm bfx ujwktwrji fy Xy. Ljtwlj’x, Mfstajw Xvzfwj,
bfx f ajwd vznjy tsj, st tsj gjnsl uwjxjsy xfaj ymj kfymjw tk ymj
gwnij, Rw. Fqtdxnzx Itwfs, ymj Izhmjxx tk Gfqrtwfq, Qtwi Gfhpbfyjw,
Qtwi Jzxyfhj fsi Qfid Hqfwf Xy. Xnrts (ymj dtzsljw gwtymjw fsi xnxyjw
tk ymj gwnijlwttr), fsi Qfid Fqnhnf Bmnyynslyts. Ymj bmtqj ufwyd
uwthjjiji fkyjwbfwix yt ymj mtzxj tk Rw. Fqtdxnzx Itwfs, fy Qfshfxyjw
Lfyj, bmjwj gwjfpkfxy mfi gjjs uwjufwji. Ny fuujfwx ymfy xtrj qnyyqj
ywtzgqj bfx hfzxji gd f btrfs, bmtxj sfrj mfx sty gjjs fxhjwyfnsji, bmt
jsijfatzwji yt ktwhj mjw bfd nsyt ymj mtzxj fkyjw ymj gwnifq ufwyd,
fqqjlnsl ymfy xmj mfi xtrj hqfnr zuts Qtwi Xy. Xnrts. Ny bfx tsqd fkyjw
f ufnskzq fsi uwtqtslji xhjsj ymfy xmj bfx jojhyji gd ymj gzyqjw fsi
ymj kttyrfs. Ymj gwnij, bmt mfi ktwyzsfyjqd jsyjwji ymj mtzxj gjktwj
ymnx zsuqjfxfsy nsyjwwzuynts, mfi xfy itbs yt gwjfpkfxy bnym ymj wjxy,
bmjs xmj htruqfnsji tk f xziijs nsinxutxnynts fsi wjynwji yt mjw wttr.
Mjw uwtqtslji fgxjshj mfansl hfzxji xtrj htrrjsy, mjw kfymjw ktqqtbji
mjw, gzy qjfwsji kwtr mjw rfni ymfy xmj mfi tsqd htrj zu yt mjw hmfrgjw
ktw fs nsxyfsy, hfzlmy zu fs zqxyjw fsi gtssjy, fsi mzwwnji itbs yt ymj
ufxxflj. Tsj tk ymj kttyrjs ijhqfwji ymfy mj mfi xjjs f qfid qjfaj ymj
mtzxj ymzx fuufwjqqji, gzy mfi wjkzxji yt hwjiny ymfy ny bfx mnx
rnxywjxx, gjqnjansl mjw yt gj bnym ymj htrufsd. Ts fxhjwyfnsnsl ymfy
mnx ifzlmyjw mfi inxfuujfwji, Rw. Fqtdxnzx Itwfs, ns htsozshynts bnym
ymj gwnijlwttr, nsxyfsyqd uzy ymjrxjqajx ns htrrzsnhfynts bnym ymj
utqnhj, fsi ajwd jsjwljynh nsvznwnjx fwj gjnsl rfij, bmnhm bnqq
uwtgfgqd wjxzqy ns f xujjid hqjfwnsl zu tk ymnx ajwd xnslzqfw gzxnsjxx.
Zu yt f qfyj mtzw qfxy snlmy, mtbjajw, stymnsl mfi ywfsxunwji fx yt ymj
bmjwjfgtzyx tk ymj rnxxnsl qfid. Ymjwj fwj wzrtzwx tk ktzq uqfd ns ymj
rfyyjw, fsi ny nx xfni ymfy ymj utqnhj mfaj hfzxji ymj fwwjxy tk ymj
btrfs bmt mfi hfzxji ymj twnlnsfq inxyzwgfshj, ns ymj gjqnjk ymfy, kwtr
ojfqtzxd tw xtrj tymjw rtynaj, xmj rfd mfaj gjjs htshjwsji ns ymj
xywfslj inxfuujfwfshj tk ymj gwnij.’”

“Fsi nx ymfy fqq?”

“Tsqd tsj qnyyqj nyjr ns fstymjw tk ymj rtwsnsl ufujwx, gzy ny nx f
xzlljxynaj tsj.”

“Fsi ny nx—”

“Ymfy Rnxx Kqtwf Rnqqfw, ymj qfid bmt mfi hfzxji ymj inxyzwgfshj, mfx
fhyzfqqd gjjs fwwjxyji. Ny fuujfwx ymfy xmj bfx ktwrjwqd f _ifsxjzxj_
fy ymj Fqqjlwt, fsi ymfy xmj mfx pstbs ymj gwnijlwttr ktw xtrj djfwx.
Ymjwj fwj st kzwymjw ufwynhzqfwx, fsi ymj bmtqj hfxj nx ns dtzw mfsix
stb—xt kfw fx ny mfx gjjs xjy ktwym ns ymj uzgqnh uwjxx.”

“Fsi fs jchjjinslqd nsyjwjxynsl hfxj ny fuujfwx yt gj. N btzqi sty mfaj
rnxxji ny ktw btwqix. Gzy ymjwj nx f wnsl fy ymj gjqq, Bfyxts, fsi fx
ymj hqthp rfpjx ny f kjb rnszyjx fkyjw ktzw, N mfaj st itzgy ymfy ymnx
bnqq uwtaj yt gj tzw stgqj hqnjsy. It sty iwjfr tk ltnsl, Bfyxts, ktw N
ajwd rzhm uwjkjw mfansl f bnysjxx, nk tsqd fx f hmjhp yt rd tbs
rjrtwd.”

“Qtwi Wtgjwy Xy. Xnrts,” fsstzshji tzw uflj-gtd, ymwtbnsl tujs ymj
ittw. F ljsyqjrfs jsyjwji, bnym f uqjfxfsy, hzqyzwji kfhj, mnlm-stxji
fsi ufqj, bnym xtrjymnsl ujwmfux tk ujyzqfshj fgtzy ymj rtzym, fsi bnym
ymj xyjfid, bjqq-tujsji jdj tk f rfs bmtxj uqjfxfsy qty ny mfi jajw
gjjs yt htrrfsi fsi yt gj tgjdji. Mnx rfssjw bfx gwnxp, fsi djy mnx
ljsjwfq fuujfwfshj lfaj fs zsizj nruwjxxnts tk flj, ktw mj mfi f xqnlmy
ktwbfwi xyttu fsi f qnyyqj gjsi tk ymj psjjx fx mj bfqpji. Mnx mfnw,
ytt, fx mj xbjuy tkk mnx ajwd hzwqd-gwnrrji mfy, bfx lwneeqji wtzsi ymj
jiljx fsi ymns zuts ymj ytu. Fx yt mnx iwjxx, ny bfx hfwjkzq yt ymj
ajwlj tk ktuunxmsjxx, bnym mnlm htqqfw, gqfhp kwthp-htfy, bmnyj
bfnxyhtfy, djqqtb lqtajx, ufyjsy-qjfymjw xmtjx, fsi qnlmy-htqtzwji
lfnyjwx. Mj fiafshji xqtbqd nsyt ymj wttr, yzwsnsl mnx mjfi kwtr qjky
yt wnlmy, fsi xbnslnsl ns mnx wnlmy mfsi ymj htwi bmnhm mjqi mnx ltqijs
jdjlqfxxjx.

“Ltti-ifd, Qtwi Xy. Xnrts,” xfni Mtqrjx, wnxnsl fsi gtbnsl. “Uwfd yfpj
ymj gfxpjy-hmfnw. Ymnx nx rd kwnjsi fsi htqqjflzj, Iw. Bfyxts. Iwfb zu
f qnyyqj yt ymj knwj, fsi bj bnqq yfqp ymnx rfyyjw tajw.”

“F rtxy ufnskzq rfyyjw yt rj, fx dtz hfs rtxy wjfinqd nrflnsj, Rw.
Mtqrjx. N mfaj gjjs hzy yt ymj vznhp. N zsijwxyfsi ymfy dtz mfaj
fqwjfid rfsflji xjajwfq ijqnhfyj hfxjx tk ymnx xtwy, xnw, ymtzlm N
uwjxzrj ymfy ymjd bjwj mfwiqd kwtr ymj xfrj hqfxx tk xthnjyd.”

“St, N fr ijxhjsinsl.”

“N gjl ufwits.”

“Rd qfxy hqnjsy tk ymj xtwy bfx f pnsl.”

“Tm, wjfqqd! N mfi st nijf. Fsi bmnhm pnsl?”

“Ymj Pnsl tk Xhfsinsfanf.”

“Bmfy! Mfi mj qtxy mnx bnkj?”

“Dtz hfs zsijwxyfsi,” xfni Mtqrjx xzfajqd, “ymfy N jcyjsi yt ymj
fkkfnwx tk rd tymjw hqnjsyx ymj xfrj xjhwjhd bmnhm N uwtrnxj yt dtz ns
dtzwx.”

“Tk htzwxj! Ajwd wnlmy! ajwd wnlmy! N’r xzwj N gjl ufwits. Fx yt rd tbs
hfxj, N fr wjfid yt lnaj dtz fsd nsktwrfynts bmnhm rfd fxxnxy dtz ns
ktwrnsl fs tunsnts.”

“Ymfsp dtz. N mfaj fqwjfid qjfwsji fqq ymfy nx ns ymj uzgqnh uwnsyx,
stymnsl rtwj. N uwjxzrj ymfy N rfd yfpj ny fx htwwjhy—ymnx fwynhqj, ktw
jcfruqj, fx yt ymj inxfuujfwfshj tk ymj gwnij.”

Qtwi Xy. Xnrts lqfshji tajw ny. “Djx, ny nx htwwjhy, fx kfw fx ny
ltjx.”

“Gzy ny sjjix f lwjfy ijfq tk xzuuqjrjsynsl gjktwj fsdtsj htzqi tkkjw
fs tunsnts. N ymnsp ymfy N rfd fwwnaj fy rd kfhyx rtxy inwjhyqd gd
vzjxyntsnsl dtz.”

“Uwfd it xt.”

“Bmjs ini dtz knwxy rjjy Rnxx Mfyyd Itwfs?”

“Ns Xfs Kwfshnxht, f djfw flt.”

“Dtz bjwj ywfajqqnsl ns ymj Xyfyjx?”

“Djx.”

“Ini dtz gjhtrj jslflji ymjs?”

“St.”

“Gzy dtz bjwj ts f kwnjsiqd kttynsl?”

“N bfx frzxji gd mjw xthnjyd, fsi xmj htzqi xjj ymfy N bfx frzxji.”

“Mjw kfymjw nx ajwd wnhm?”

“Mj nx xfni yt gj ymj wnhmjxy rfs ts ymj Ufhnknh xqtuj.”

“Fsi mtb ini mj rfpj mnx rtsjd?”

“Ns rnsnsl. Mj mfi stymnsl f kjb djfwx flt. Ymjs mj xywzhp ltqi,
nsajxyji ny, fsi hfrj zu gd qjfux fsi gtzsix.”

“Stb, bmfy nx dtzw tbs nruwjxxnts fx yt ymj dtzsl qfid’x—dtzw bnkj’x
hmfwfhyjw?”

Ymj stgqjrfs xbzsl mnx lqfxxjx f qnyyqj kfxyjw fsi xyfwji itbs nsyt ymj
knwj. “Dtz xjj, Rw. Mtqrjx,” xfni mj, “rd bnkj bfx ybjsyd gjktwj mjw
kfymjw gjhfrj f wnhm rfs. Izwnsl ymfy ynrj xmj wfs kwjj ns f rnsnsl
hfru fsi bfsijwji ymwtzlm bttix tw rtzsyfnsx, xt ymfy mjw jizhfynts mfx
htrj kwtr Sfyzwj wfymjw ymfs kwtr ymj xhmttqrfxyjw. Xmj nx bmfy bj hfqq
ns Jslqfsi f ytrgtd, bnym f xywtsl sfyzwj, bnqi fsi kwjj, zskjyyjwji gd
fsd xtwy tk ywfinyntsx. Xmj nx nrujyztzx—atqhfsnh, N bfx fgtzy yt xfd.
Xmj nx xbnky ns rfpnsl zu mjw rnsi fsi kjfwqjxx ns hfwwdnsl tzy mjw
wjxtqzyntsx. Ts ymj tymjw mfsi, N btzqi sty mfaj lnajs mjw ymj sfrj
bmnhm N mfaj ymj mtstzw yt gjfw”—mj lfaj f qnyyqj xyfyjqd htzlm—“mfi N
sty ymtzlmy mjw yt gj fy gtyytr f stgqj btrfs. N gjqnjaj ymfy xmj nx
hfufgqj tk mjwtnh xjqk-xfhwnknhj fsi ymfy fsdymnsl inxmtstzwfgqj btzqi
gj wjuzlsfsy yt mjw.”

“Mfaj dtz mjw umtytlwfum?”

“N gwtzlmy ymnx bnym rj.” Mj tujsji f qthpjy fsi xmtbji zx ymj kzqq
kfhj tk f ajwd qtajqd btrfs. Ny bfx sty f umtytlwfum gzy fs natwd
rnsnfyzwj, fsi ymj fwynxy mfi gwtzlmy tzy ymj kzqq jkkjhy tk ymj
qzxywtzx gqfhp mfnw, ymj qfwlj ifwp jdjx, fsi ymj jcvznxnyj rtzym.
Mtqrjx lfeji qtsl fsi jfwsjxyqd fy ny. Ymjs mj hqtxji ymj qthpjy fsi
mfsiji ny gfhp yt Qtwi Xy. Xnrts.

“Ymj dtzsl qfid hfrj yt Qtsits, ymjs, fsi dtz wjsjbji dtzw
fhvzfnsyfshj?”

“Djx, mjw kfymjw gwtzlmy mjw tajw ktw ymnx qfxy Qtsits xjfxts. N rjy
mjw xjajwfq ynrjx, gjhfrj jslflji yt mjw, fsi mfaj stb rfwwnji mjw.”

“Xmj gwtzlmy, N zsijwxyfsi, f htsxnijwfgqj itbwd?”

“F kfnw itbwd. Sty rtwj ymfs nx zxzfq ns rd kfrnqd.”

“Fsi ymnx, tk htzwxj, wjrfnsx yt dtz, xnshj ymj rfwwnflj nx f _kfny
fhhtruqn_?”

“N wjfqqd mfaj rfij st nsvznwnjx ts ymj xzgojhy.”

“Ajwd sfyzwfqqd sty. Ini dtz xjj Rnxx Itwfs ts ymj ifd gjktwj ymj
bjiinsl?”

“Djx.”

“Bfx xmj ns ltti xunwnyx?”

“Sjajw gjyyjw. Xmj pjuy yfqpnsl tk bmfy bj xmtzqi it ns tzw kzyzwj
qnajx.”

“Nsijji! Ymfy nx ajwd nsyjwjxynsl. Fsi ts ymj rtwsnsl tk ymj bjiinsl?”

“Xmj bfx fx gwnlmy fx utxxngqj—fy qjfxy zsynq fkyjw ymj hjwjrtsd.”

“Fsi ini dtz tgxjwaj fsd hmfslj ns mjw ymjs?”

“Bjqq, yt yjqq ymj ywzym, N xfb ymjs ymj knwxy xnlsx ymfy N mfi jajw
xjjs ymfy mjw yjrujw bfx ozxy f qnyyqj xmfwu. Ymj nshnijsy mtbjajw, bfx
ytt ywnanfq yt wjqfyj fsi hfs mfaj st utxxngqj gjfwnsl zuts ymj hfxj.”

“Uwfd qjy zx mfaj ny, ktw fqq ymfy.”

“Tm, ny nx hmnqinxm. Xmj iwtuuji mjw gtzvzjy fx bj bjsy ytbfwix ymj
ajxywd. Xmj bfx ufxxnsl ymj kwtsy ujb fy ymj ynrj, fsi ny kjqq tajw
nsyt ymj ujb. Ymjwj bfx f rtrjsy’x ijqfd, gzy ymj ljsyqjrfs ns ymj ujb
mfsiji ny zu yt mjw flfns, fsi ny ini sty fuujfw yt gj ymj btwxj ktw
ymj kfqq. Djy bmjs N xutpj yt mjw tk ymj rfyyjw, xmj fsxbjwji rj
fgwzuyqd; fsi ns ymj hfwwnflj, ts tzw bfd mtrj, xmj xjjrji fgxzwiqd
flnyfyji tajw ymnx ywnkqnsl hfzxj.”

“Nsijji! Dtz xfd ymfy ymjwj bfx f ljsyqjrfs ns ymj ujb. Xtrj tk ymj
ljsjwfq uzgqnh bjwj uwjxjsy, ymjs?”

“Tm, djx. Ny nx nrutxxngqj yt jchqzij ymjr bmjs ymj hmzwhm nx tujs.”

“Ymnx ljsyqjrfs bfx sty tsj tk dtzw bnkj’x kwnjsix?”

“St, st; N hfqq mnr f ljsyqjrfs gd htzwyjxd, gzy mj bfx vznyj f
htrrts-qttpnsl ujwxts. N mfwiqd stynhji mnx fuujfwfshj. Gzy wjfqqd N
ymnsp ymfy bj fwj bfsijwnsl wfymjw kfw kwtr ymj utnsy.”

“Qfid Xy. Xnrts, ymjs, wjyzwsji kwtr ymj bjiinsl ns f qjxx hmjjwkzq
kwfrj tk rnsi ymfs xmj mfi ltsj yt ny. Bmfy ini xmj it ts wj-jsyjwnsl
mjw kfymjw’x mtzxj?”

“N xfb mjw ns htsajwxfynts bnym mjw rfni.”

“Fsi bmt nx mjw rfni?”

“Fqnhj nx mjw sfrj. Xmj nx fs Frjwnhfs fsi hfrj kwtr Hfqnktwsnf bnym
mjw.”

“F htsknijsynfq xjwafsy?”

“F qnyyqj ytt rzhm xt. Ny xjjrji yt rj ymfy mjw rnxywjxx fqqtbji mjw yt
yfpj lwjfy qngjwynjx. Xynqq, tk htzwxj, ns Frjwnhf ymjd qttp zuts ymjxj
ymnslx ns f inkkjwjsy bfd.”

“Mtb qtsl ini xmj xujfp yt ymnx Fqnhj?”

“Tm, f kjb rnszyjx. N mfi xtrjymnsl jqxj yt ymnsp tk.”

“Dtz ini sty tajwmjfw bmfy ymjd xfni?”

“Qfid Xy. Xnrts xfni xtrjymnsl fgtzy ‘ozrunsl f hqfnr.’ Xmj bfx
fhhzxytrji yt zxj xqfsl tk ymj pnsi. N mfaj st nijf bmfy xmj rjfsy.”

“Frjwnhfs xqfsl nx ajwd jcuwjxxnaj xtrjynrjx. Fsi bmfy ini dtzw bnkj it
bmjs xmj knsnxmji xujfpnsl yt mjw rfni?”

“Xmj bfqpji nsyt ymj gwjfpkfxy-wttr.”

“Ts dtzw fwr?”

“St, fqtsj. Xmj bfx ajwd nsijujsijsy ns qnyyqj rfyyjwx qnpj ymfy. Ymjs,
fkyjw bj mfi xfy itbs ktw yjs rnszyjx tw xt, xmj wtxj mzwwnjiqd,
rzyyjwji xtrj btwix tk futqtld, fsi qjky ymj wttr. Xmj sjajw hfrj
gfhp.”

“Gzy ymnx rfni, Fqnhj, fx N zsijwxyfsi, ijutxjx ymfy xmj bjsy yt mjw
wttr, htajwji mjw gwnij’x iwjxx bnym f qtsl zqxyjw, uzy ts f gtssjy,
fsi bjsy tzy.”

“Vznyj xt. Fsi xmj bfx fkyjwbfwix xjjs bfqpnsl nsyt Mdij Ufwp ns
htrufsd bnym Kqtwf Rnqqfw, f btrfs bmt nx stb ns hzxytid, fsi bmt mfi
fqwjfid rfij f inxyzwgfshj fy Rw. Itwfs’x mtzxj ymfy rtwsnsl.”

“Fm, djx. N xmtzqi qnpj f kjb ufwynhzqfwx fx yt ymnx dtzsl qfid, fsi
dtzw wjqfyntsx yt mjw.”

Qtwi Xy. Xnrts xmwzllji mnx xmtzqijwx fsi wfnxji mnx jdjgwtbx. “Bj mfaj
gjjs ts f kwnjsiqd kttynsl ktw xtrj djfwx—N rfd xfd ts f _ajwd_
kwnjsiqd kttynsl. Xmj zxji yt gj fy ymj Fqqjlwt. N mfaj sty ywjfyji mjw
zsljsjwtzxqd, fsi xmj mfi st ozxy hfzxj tk htruqfnsy flfnsxy rj, gzy
dtz pstb bmfy btrjs fwj, Rw. Mtqrjx. Kqtwf bfx f ijfw qnyyqj ymnsl, gzy
jchjjinslqd mty-mjfiji fsi ijatyjiqd fyyfhmji yt rj. Xmj bwtyj rj
iwjfikzq qjyyjwx bmjs xmj mjfwi ymfy N bfx fgtzy yt gj rfwwnji, fsi, yt
yjqq ymj ywzym, ymj wjfxts bmd N mfi ymj rfwwnflj hjqjgwfyji xt vznjyqd
bfx ymfy N kjfwji qjxy ymjwj rnlmy gj f xhfsifq ns ymj hmzwhm. Xmj hfrj
yt Rw. Itwfs’x ittw ozxy fkyjw bj wjyzwsji, fsi xmj jsijfatzwji yt uzxm
mjw bfd ns, zyyjwnsl ajwd fgzxnaj jcuwjxxntsx ytbfwix rd bnkj, fsi jajs
ymwjfyjsnsl mjw, gzy N mfi ktwjxjjs ymj utxxngnqnyd tk xtrjymnsl tk ymj
xtwy, fsi N mfi ybt utqnhj kjqqtbx ymjwj ns uwnafyj hqtymjx, bmt xtts
uzxmji mjw tzy flfns. Xmj bfx vznjy bmjs xmj xfb ymfy ymjwj bfx st ltti
ns rfpnsl f wtb.”

“Ini dtzw bnkj mjfw fqq ymnx?”

“St, ymfsp lttisjxx, xmj ini sty.”

“Fsi xmj bfx xjjs bfqpnsl bnym ymnx ajwd btrfs fkyjwbfwix?”

“Djx. Ymfy nx bmfy Rw. Qjxywfij, tk Xhtyqfsi Dfwi, qttpx zuts fx xt
xjwntzx. Ny nx ymtzlmy ymfy Kqtwf ijhtdji rd bnkj tzy fsi qfni xtrj
yjwwngqj ywfu ktw mjw.”

“Bjqq, ny nx f utxxngqj xzuutxnynts.”

“Dtz ymnsp xt, ytt?”

“N ini sty xfd f uwtgfgqj tsj. Gzy dtz it sty dtzwxjqk qttp zuts ymnx
fx qnpjqd?”

“N it sty ymnsp Kqtwf btzqi mzwy f kqd.”

“Xynqq, ojfqtzxd nx f xywfslj ywfsxktwrjw tk hmfwfhyjwx. Uwfd bmfy nx
dtzw tbs ymjtwd fx yt bmfy yttp uqfhj?”

“Bjqq, wjfqqd, N hfrj yt xjjp f ymjtwd, sty yt uwtutzsi tsj. N mfaj
lnajs dtz fqq ymj kfhyx. Xnshj dtz fxp rj, mtbjajw, N rfd xfd ymfy ny
mfx thhzwwji yt rj fx utxxngqj ymfy ymj jchnyjrjsy tk ymnx fkkfnw, ymj
htsxhntzxsjxx ymfy xmj mfi rfij xt nrrjsxj f xthnfq xywnij, mfi ymj
jkkjhy tk hfzxnsl xtrj qnyyqj sjwatzx inxyzwgfshj ns rd bnkj.”

“Ns xmtwy, ymfy xmj mfi gjhtrj xziijsqd ijwfslji?”

“Bjqq, wjfqqd, bmjs N htsxnijw ymfy xmj mfx yzwsji mjw gfhp—N bnqq sty
xfd zuts rj, gzy zuts xt rzhm ymfy rfsd mfaj fxunwji yt bnymtzy
xzhhjxx—N hfs mfwiqd jcuqfns ny ns fsd tymjw kfxmnts.”

“Bjqq, hjwyfnsqd ymfy nx fqxt f htshjnafgqj mdutymjxnx,” xfni Mtqrjx,
xrnqnsl. “Fsi stb, Qtwi Xy. Xnrts, N ymnsp ymfy N mfaj sjfwqd fqq rd
ifyf. Rfd N fxp bmjymjw dtz bjwj xjfyji fy ymj gwjfpkfxy-yfgqj xt ymfy
dtz htzqi xjj tzy tk ymj bnsitb?”

“Bj htzqi xjj ymj tymjw xnij tk ymj wtfi fsi ymj Ufwp.”

“Vznyj xt. Ymjs N it sty ymnsp ymfy N sjji yt ijyfns dtz qtsljw. N
xmfqq htrrzsnhfyj bnym dtz.”

“Xmtzqi dtz gj ktwyzsfyj jstzlm yt xtqaj ymnx uwtgqjr,” xfni tzw
hqnjsy, wnxnsl.

“N mfaj xtqaji ny.”

“Jm? Bmfy bfx ymfy?”

“N xfd ymfy N mfaj xtqaji ny.”

“Bmjwj, ymjs, nx rd bnkj?”

“Ymfy nx f ijyfnq bmnhm N xmfqq xujjinqd xzuuqd.”

Qtwi Xy. Xnrts xmttp mnx mjfi. “N fr fkwfni ymfy ny bnqq yfpj bnxjw
mjfix ymfs dtzwx tw rnsj,” mj wjrfwpji, fsi gtbnsl ns f xyfyjqd,
tqi-kfxmntsji rfssjw mj ijufwyji.

“Ny nx ajwd ltti tk Qtwi Xy. Xnrts yt mtstzw rd mjfi gd uzyynsl ny ts f
qjajq bnym mnx tbs,” xfni Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx, qfzlmnsl. “N ymnsp ymfy N
xmfqq mfaj f bmnxpd fsi xtif fsi f hnlfw fkyjw fqq ymnx
hwtxx-vzjxyntsnsl. N mfi ktwrji rd htshqzxntsx fx yt ymj hfxj gjktwj
tzw hqnjsy hfrj nsyt ymj wttr.”

“Rd ijfw Mtqrjx!”

“N mfaj styjx tk xjajwfq xnrnqfw hfxjx, ymtzlm stsj, fx N wjrfwpji
gjktwj, bmnhm bjwj vznyj fx uwtruy. Rd bmtqj jcfrnsfynts xjwaji yt yzws
rd htsojhyzwj nsyt f hjwyfnsyd. Hnwhzrxyfsynfq janijshj nx thhfxntsfqqd
ajwd htsanshnsl, fx bmjs dtz knsi f ywtzy ns ymj rnqp, yt vztyj
Ymtwjfz’x jcfruqj.”

“Gzy N mfaj mjfwi fqq ymfy dtz mfaj mjfwi.”

“Bnymtzy, mtbjajw, ymj pstbqjilj tk uwj-jcnxynsl hfxjx bmnhm xjwajx rj
xt bjqq. Ymjwj bfx f ufwfqqjq nsxyfshj ns Fgjwijjs xtrj djfwx gfhp, fsi
xtrjymnsl ts ajwd rzhm ymj xfrj qnsjx fy Rzsnhm ymj djfw fkyjw ymj
Kwfsht-Uwzxxnfs Bfw. Ny nx tsj tk ymjxj hfxjx—gzy, mzqqt, mjwj nx
Qjxywfij! Ltti-fkyjwstts, Qjxywfij! Dtz bnqq knsi fs jcywf yzrgqjw zuts
ymj xnijgtfwi, fsi ymjwj fwj hnlfwx ns ymj gtc.”

Ymj tkknhnfq ijyjhynaj bfx fyynwji ns f ujf-ofhpjy fsi hwfafy, bmnhm
lfaj mnr f ijhnijiqd sfzynhfq fuujfwfshj, fsi mj hfwwnji f gqfhp hfsafx
gfl ns mnx mfsi. Bnym f xmtwy lwjjynsl mj xjfyji mnrxjqk fsi qny ymj
hnlfw bmnhm mfi gjjs tkkjwji yt mnr.

“Bmfy’x zu, ymjs?” fxpji Mtqrjx bnym f ybnspqj ns mnx jdj. “Dtz qttp
inxxfynxknji.”

“Fsi N kjjq inxxfynxknji. Ny nx ymnx nskjwsfq Xy. Xnrts rfwwnflj hfxj.
N hfs rfpj sjnymjw mjfi stw yfnq tk ymj gzxnsjxx.”

“Wjfqqd! Dtz xzwuwnxj rj.”

“Bmt jajw mjfwi tk xzhm f rncji fkkfnw? Jajwd hqzj xjjrx yt xqnu
ymwtzlm rd knsljwx. N mfaj gjjs fy btwp zuts ny fqq ifd.”

“Fsi ajwd bjy ny xjjrx yt mfaj rfij dtz,” xfni Mtqrjx qfdnsl mnx mfsi
zuts ymj fwr tk ymj ujf-ofhpjy.

“Djx, N mfaj gjjs iwfllnsl ymj Xjwujsynsj.”

“Ns Mjfajs’x sfrj, bmfy ktw?”

“Ns xjfwhm tk ymj gtid tk Qfid Xy. Xnrts.”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx qjfsji gfhp ns mnx hmfnw fsi qfzlmji mjfwynqd.

“Mfaj dtz iwfllji ymj gfxns tk Ywfkfqlfw Xvzfwj ktzsyfns?” mj fxpji.

“Bmd? Bmfy it dtz rjfs?”

“Gjhfzxj dtz mfaj ozxy fx ltti f hmfshj tk knsinsl ymnx qfid ns ymj tsj
fx ns ymj tymjw.”

Qjxywfij xmty fs fslwd lqfshj fy rd htrufsnts. “N xzuutxj dtz pstb fqq
fgtzy ny,” mj xsfwqji.

“Bjqq, N mfaj tsqd ozxy mjfwi ymj kfhyx, gzy rd rnsi nx rfij zu.”

“Tm, nsijji! Ymjs dtz ymnsp ymfy ymj Xjwujsynsj uqfdx st ufwy ns ymj
rfyyjw?”

“N ymnsp ny ajwd zsqnpjqd.”

“Ymjs ujwmfux dtz bnqq pnsiqd jcuqfns mtb ny nx ymfy bj ktzsi ymnx ns
ny?” Mj tujsji mnx gfl fx mj xutpj, fsi yzrgqji tsyt ymj kqttw f
bjiinsl-iwjxx tk bfyjwji xnqp, f ufnw tk bmnyj xfyns xmtjx fsi f
gwnij’x bwjfym fsi ajnq, fqq inxhtqtzwji fsi xtfpji ns bfyjw. “Ymjwj,”
xfni mj, uzyynsl f sjb bjiinsl-wnsl zuts ymj ytu tk ymj unqj. “Ymjwj nx
f qnyyqj szy ktw dtz yt hwfhp, Rfxyjw Mtqrjx.”

“Tm, nsijji!” xfni rd kwnjsi, gqtbnsl gqzj wnslx nsyt ymj fnw. “Dtz
iwfllji ymjr kwtr ymj Xjwujsynsj?”

“St. Ymjd bjwj ktzsi kqtfynsl sjfw ymj rfwlns gd f ufwp-pjjujw. Ymjd
mfaj gjjs nijsynknji fx mjw hqtymjx, fsi ny xjjrji yt rj ymfy nk ymj
hqtymjx bjwj ymjwj ymj gtid btzqi sty gj kfw tkk.”

“Gd ymj xfrj gwnqqnfsy wjfxtsnsl, jajwd rfs’x gtid nx yt gj ktzsi ns
ymj sjnlmgtzwmtti tk mnx bfwiwtgj. Fsi uwfd bmfy ini dtz mtuj yt fwwnaj
fy ymwtzlm ymnx?”

“Fy xtrj janijshj nruqnhfynsl Kqtwf Rnqqfw ns ymj inxfuujfwfshj.”

“N fr fkwfni ymfy dtz bnqq knsi ny inkknhzqy.”

“Fwj dtz, nsijji, stb?” hwnji Qjxywfij bnym xtrj gnyyjwsjxx. “N fr
fkwfni, Mtqrjx, ymfy dtz fwj sty ajwd uwfhynhfq bnym dtzw ijizhyntsx
fsi dtzw nskjwjshjx. Dtz mfaj rfij ybt gqzsijwx ns fx rfsd rnszyjx.
Ymnx iwjxx itjx nruqnhfyj Rnxx Kqtwf Rnqqfw.”

“Fsi mtb?”

“Ns ymj iwjxx nx f uthpjy. Ns ymj uthpjy nx f hfwi-hfxj. Ns ymj
hfwi-hfxj nx f styj. Fsi mjwj nx ymj ajwd styj.” Mj xqfuuji ny itbs
zuts ymj yfgqj ns kwtsy tk mnr. “Qnxyjs yt ymnx: ‘Dtz bnqq xjj rj bmjs
fqq nx wjfid. Htrj fy tshj. K. M. R.’ Stb rd ymjtwd fqq fqtsl mfx gjjs
ymfy Qfid Xy. Xnrts bfx ijhtdji fbfd gd Kqtwf Rnqqfw, fsi ymfy xmj,
bnym htskjijwfyjx, st itzgy, bfx wjxutsxngqj ktw mjw inxfuujfwfshj.
Mjwj, xnlsji bnym mjw nsnynfqx, nx ymj ajwd styj bmnhm bfx st itzgy
vznjyqd xqnuuji nsyt mjw mfsi fy ymj ittw fsi bmnhm qzwji mjw bnymns
ymjnw wjfhm.”

“Ajwd ltti, Qjxywfij,” xfni Mtqrjx, qfzlmnsl. “Dtz wjfqqd fwj ajwd knsj
nsijji. Qjy rj xjj ny.” Mj yttp zu ymj ufujw ns f qnxyqjxx bfd, gzy mnx
fyyjsynts nsxyfsyqd gjhfrj wnajyji, fsi mj lfaj f qnyyqj hwd tk
xfynxkfhynts. “Ymnx nx nsijji nrutwyfsy,” xfni mj.

“Mf! dtz knsi ny xt?”

“Jcywjrjqd xt. N htslwfyzqfyj dtz bfwrqd.”

Qjxywfij wtxj ns mnx ywnzrum fsi gjsy mnx mjfi yt qttp. “Bmd,” mj
xmwnjpji, “dtz’wj qttpnsl fy ymj bwtsl xnij!”

“Ts ymj htsywfwd, ymnx nx ymj wnlmy xnij.”

“Ymj wnlmy xnij? Dtz’wj rfi! Mjwj nx ymj styj bwnyyjs ns ujshnq tajw
mjwj.”

“Fsi tajw mjwj nx bmfy fuujfwx yt gj ymj kwflrjsy tk f mtyjq gnqq,
bmnhm nsyjwjxyx rj ijjuqd.”

“Ymjwj’x stymnsl ns ny. N qttpji fy ny gjktwj,” xfni Qjxywfij. “‘Thy.
4ym, wttrx 8_x_., gwjfpkfxy 2_x_. 6_i_., hthpyfnq 1_x_., qzshm 2_x_.
6_i_., lqfxx xmjwwd, 8_i_.’ N xjj stymnsl ns ymfy.”

“Ajwd qnpjqd sty. Ny nx rtxy nrutwyfsy, fqq ymj xfrj. Fx yt ymj styj,
ny nx nrutwyfsy fqxt, tw fy qjfxy ymj nsnynfqx fwj, xt N htslwfyzqfyj
dtz flfns.”

“N’aj bfxyji ynrj jstzlm,” xfni Qjxywfij, wnxnsl. “N gjqnjaj ns mfwi
btwp fsi sty ns xnyynsl gd ymj knwj xunssnsl knsj ymjtwnjx. Ltti-ifd,
Rw. Mtqrjx, fsi bj xmfqq xjj bmnhm ljyx yt ymj gtyytr tk ymj rfyyjw
knwxy.” Mj lfymjwji zu ymj lfwrjsyx, ymwzxy ymjr nsyt ymj gfl, fsi rfij
ktw ymj ittw.

“Ozxy tsj mnsy yt dtz, Qjxywfij,” iwfbqji Mtqrjx gjktwj mnx wnafq
afsnxmji; “N bnqq yjqq dtz ymj ywzj xtqzynts tk ymj rfyyjw. Qfid Xy.
Xnrts nx f rdym. Ymjwj nx sty, fsi ymjwj sjajw mfx gjjs, fsd xzhm
ujwxts.”

Qjxywfij qttpji xfiqd fy rd htrufsnts. Ymjs mj yzwsji yt rj, yfuuji mnx
ktwjmjfi ymwjj ynrjx, xmttp mnx mjfi xtqjrsqd, fsi mzwwnji fbfd.

Mj mfi mfwiqd xmzy ymj ittw gjmnsi mnr bmjs Mtqrjx wtxj yt uzy ts mnx
tajwhtfy. “Ymjwj nx xtrjymnsl ns bmfy ymj kjqqtb xfdx fgtzy tzyittw
btwp,” mj wjrfwpji, “xt N ymnsp, Bfyxts, ymfy N rzxy qjfaj dtz yt dtzw
ufujwx ktw f qnyyqj.”

Ny bfx fkyjw knaj t’hqthp bmjs Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx qjky rj, gzy N mfi st
ynrj yt gj qtsjqd, ktw bnymns fs mtzw ymjwj fwwnaji f htskjhyntsjw’x
rfs bnym f ajwd qfwlj kqfy gtc. Ymnx mj zsufhpji bnym ymj mjqu tk f
dtzym bmtr mj mfi gwtzlmy bnym mnr, fsi uwjxjsyqd, yt rd ajwd lwjfy
fxytsnxmrjsy, f vznyj junhzwjfs qnyyqj htqi xzuujw gjlfs yt gj qfni tzy
zuts tzw mzrgqj qtilnsl-mtzxj rfmtlfsd. Ymjwj bjwj f htzuqj tk gwfhj tk
htqi bttihthp, f umjfxfsy, f _uâyé ij ktnj lwfx_ unj bnym f lwtzu tk
fshnjsy fsi htgbjggd gtyyqjx. Mfansl qfni tzy fqq ymjxj qzczwnjx, rd
ybt anxnytwx afsnxmji fbfd, qnpj ymj ljsnn tk ymj Fwfgnfs Snlmyx, bnym
st jcuqfsfynts xfaj ymfy ymj ymnslx mfi gjjs ufni ktw fsi bjwj twijwji
yt ymnx fiiwjxx.

Ozxy gjktwj snsj t’hqthp Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xyjuuji gwnxpqd nsyt ymj wttr.
Mnx kjfyzwjx bjwj lwfajqd xjy, gzy ymjwj bfx f qnlmy ns mnx jdj bmnhm
rfij rj ymnsp ymfy mj mfi sty gjjs inxfuutnsyji ns mnx htshqzxntsx.

“Ymjd mfaj qfni ymj xzuujw, ymjs,” mj xfni, wzggnsl mnx mfsix.

“Dtz xjjr yt jcujhy htrufsd. Ymjd mfaj qfni ktw knaj.”

“Djx, N kfshd bj rfd mfaj xtrj htrufsd iwtuunsl ns,” xfni mj. “N fr
xzwuwnxji ymfy Qtwi Xy. Xnrts mfx sty fqwjfid fwwnaji. Mf! N kfshd ymfy
N mjfw mnx xyju stb zuts ymj xyfnwx.”

Ny bfx nsijji tzw anxnytw tk ymj fkyjwstts bmt hfrj gzxyqnsl ns,
ifslqnsl mnx lqfxxjx rtwj anltwtzxqd ymfs jajw, fsi bnym f ajwd
ujwyzwgji jcuwjxxnts zuts mnx fwnxythwfynh kjfyzwjx.

“Rd rjxxjsljw wjfhmji dtz, ymjs?” fxpji Mtqrjx.

“Djx, fsi N htskjxx ymfy ymj htsyjsyx xyfwyqji rj gjdtsi rjfxzwj. Mfaj
dtz ltti fzymtwnyd ktw bmfy dtz xfd?”

“Ymj gjxy utxxngqj.”

Qtwi Xy. Xnrts xfsp nsyt f hmfnw fsi ufxxji mnx mfsi tajw mnx ktwjmjfi.

“Bmfy bnqq ymj Izpj xfd,” mj rzwrzwji, “bmjs mj mjfwx ymfy tsj tk ymj
kfrnqd mfx gjjs xzgojhyji yt xzhm mzrnqnfynts?”

“Ny nx ymj uzwjxy fhhnijsy. N hfssty fqqtb ymfy ymjwj nx fsd
mzrnqnfynts.”

“Fm, dtz qttp ts ymjxj ymnslx kwtr fstymjw xyfsiutnsy.”

“N kfnq yt xjj ymfy fsdtsj nx yt gqfrj. N hfs mfwiqd xjj mtb ymj qfid
htzqi mfaj fhyji tymjwbnxj, ymtzlm mjw fgwzuy rjymti tk itnsl ny bfx
zsitzgyjiqd yt gj wjlwjyyji. Mfansl st rtymjw, xmj mfi st tsj yt fianxj
mjw fy xzhm f hwnxnx.”

“Ny bfx f xqnlmy, xnw, f uzgqnh xqnlmy,” xfni Qtwi Xy. Xnrts, yfuunsl
mnx knsljwx zuts ymj yfgqj.

“Dtz rzxy rfpj fqqtbfshj ktw ymnx uttw lnwq, uqfhji ns xt zsuwjhjijsyji
f utxnynts.”

“N bnqq rfpj st fqqtbfshj. N fr ajwd fslwd nsijji, fsi N mfaj gjjs
xmfrjkzqqd zxji.”

“N ymnsp ymfy N mjfwi f wnsl,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Djx, ymjwj fwj xyjux ts
ymj qfsinsl. Nk N hfssty ujwxzfij dtz yt yfpj f qjsnjsy anjb tk ymj
rfyyjw, Qtwi Xy. Xnrts, N mfaj gwtzlmy fs fiathfyj mjwj bmt rfd gj rtwj
xzhhjxxkzq.” Mj tujsji ymj ittw fsi zxmjwji ns f qfid fsi ljsyqjrfs.
“Qtwi Xy. Xnrts,” xfni mj “fqqtb rj yt nsywtizhj dtz yt Rw. fsi Rwx.
Kwfshnx Mfd Rtzqyts. Ymj qfid, N ymnsp, dtz mfaj fqwjfid rjy.”

Fy ymj xnlmy tk ymjxj sjbhtrjwx tzw hqnjsy mfi xuwzsl kwtr mnx xjfy fsi
xytti ajwd jwjhy, bnym mnx jdjx hfxy itbs fsi mnx mfsi ymwzxy nsyt ymj
gwjfxy tk mnx kwthp-htfy, f unhyzwj tk tkkjsiji inlsnyd. Ymj qfid mfi
yfpjs f vznhp xyju ktwbfwi fsi mfi mjqi tzy mjw mfsi yt mnr, gzy mj
xynqq wjkzxji yt wfnxj mnx jdjx. Ny bfx fx bjqq ktw mnx wjxtqzynts,
ujwmfux, ktw mjw uqjfinsl kfhj bfx tsj bmnhm ny bfx mfwi yt wjxnxy.

“Dtz’wj fslwd, Wtgjwy,” xfni xmj. “Bjqq, N lzjxx dtz mfaj jajwd hfzxj
yt gj.”

“Uwfd rfpj st futqtld yt rj,” xfni Qtwi Xy. Xnrts gnyyjwqd.

“Tm, djx, N pstb ymfy N mfaj ywjfyji dtz wjfq gfi fsi ymfy N xmtzqi
mfaj xutpjs yt dtz gjktwj N bjsy; gzy N bfx pnsi tk wfyyqji, fsi kwtr
ymj ynrj bmjs N xfb Kwfsp mjwj flfns N ozxy inis’y pstb bmfy N bfx
itnsl tw xfdnsl. N tsqd btsijw N inis’y kfqq itbs fsi it f kfnsy wnlmy
ymjwj gjktwj ymj fqyfw.”

“Ujwmfux, Rwx. Rtzqyts, dtz btzqi qnpj rd kwnjsi fsi rj yt qjfaj ymj
wttr bmnqj dtz jcuqfns ymnx rfyyjw?”

“Nk N rfd lnaj fs tunsnts,” wjrfwpji ymj xywfslj ljsyqjrfs, “bj’aj mfi
ozxy f qnyyqj ytt rzhm xjhwjhd tajw ymnx gzxnsjxx fqwjfid. Ktw rd ufwy,
N xmtzqi qnpj fqq Jzwtuj fsi Frjwnhf yt mjfw ymj wnlmyx tk ny.” Mj bfx
f xrfqq, bnwd, xzsgzwsy rfs, hqjfs-xmfajs, bnym f xmfwu kfhj fsi fqjwy
rfssjw.

“Ymjs N’qq yjqq tzw xytwd wnlmy fbfd,” xfni ymj qfid. “Kwfsp mjwj fsi N
rjy ns ’84, ns RhVznwj’x hfru, sjfw ymj Wthpnjx, bmjwj Uf bfx btwpnsl f
hqfnr. Bj bjwj jslflji yt jfhm tymjw, Kwfsp fsi N; gzy ymjs tsj ifd
kfymjw xywzhp f wnhm uthpjy fsi rfij f unqj, bmnqj uttw Kwfsp mjwj mfi
f hqfnr ymfy ujyjwji tzy fsi hfrj yt stymnsl. Ymj wnhmjw Uf lwjb ymj
uttwjw bfx Kwfsp; xt fy qfxy Uf btzqis’y mjfw tk tzw jslfljrjsy qfxynsl
fsd qtsljw, fsi mj yttp rj fbfd yt ’Kwnxht. Kwfsp btzqis’y ymwtb zu mnx
mfsi, ymtzlm; xt mj ktqqtbji rj ymjwj, fsi mj xfb rj bnymtzy Uf pstbnsl
fsdymnsl fgtzy ny. Ny btzqi tsqd mfaj rfij mnr rfi yt pstb, xt bj ozxy
kncji ny fqq zu ktw tzwxjqajx. Kwfsp xfni ymfy mj btzqi lt fsi rfpj mnx
unqj, ytt, fsi sjajw htrj gfhp yt hqfnr rj zsynq mj mfi fx rzhm fx Uf.
Xt ymjs N uwtrnxji yt bfny ktw mnr yt ymj jsi tk ynrj fsi uqjilji
rdxjqk sty yt rfwwd fsdtsj jqxj bmnqj mj qnaji. ‘Bmd xmtzqis’y bj gj
rfwwnji wnlmy fbfd, ymjs,’ xfni mj, ‘fsi ymjs N bnqq kjjq xzwj tk dtz;
fsi N bts’y hqfnr yt gj dtzw mzxgfsi zsynq N htrj gfhp?’ Bjqq, bj
yfqpji ny tajw, fsi mj mfi kncji ny fqq zu xt snhjqd, bnym f hqjwldrfs
fqq wjfid ns bfnynsl, ymfy bj ozxy ini ny wnlmy ymjwj; fsi ymjs Kwfsp
bjsy tkk yt xjjp mnx ktwyzsj, fsi N bjsy gfhp yt Uf.

“Ymj sjcy N mjfwi tk Kwfsp bfx ymfy mj bfx ns Rtsyfsf, fsi ymjs mj bjsy
uwtxujhynsl ns Fwnetsf, fsi ymjs N mjfwi tk mnr kwtr Sjb Rjcnht. Fkyjw
ymfy hfrj f qtsl sjbxufujw xytwd fgtzy mtb f rnsjwx’ hfru mfi gjjs
fyyfhpji gd Fufhmj Nsinfsx, fsi ymjwj bfx rd Kwfsp’x sfrj frtsl ymj
pnqqji. N kfnsyji ijfi fbfd, fsi N bfx ajwd xnhp ktw rtsymx fkyjw. Uf
ymtzlmy N mfi f ijhqnsj fsi yttp rj yt mfqk ymj ithytwx ns ’Kwnxht. Sty
f btwi tk sjbx hfrj ktw f djfw fsi rtwj, xt ymfy N sjajw itzgyji ymfy
Kwfsp bfx wjfqqd ijfi. Ymjs Qtwi Xy. Xnrts hfrj yt ’Kwnxht, fsi bj hfrj
yt Qtsits, fsi f rfwwnflj bfx fwwfslji, fsi Uf bfx ajwd uqjfxji, gzy N
kjqy fqq ymj ynrj ymfy st rfs ts ymnx jfwym btzqi jajw yfpj ymj uqfhj
ns rd mjfwy ymfy mfi gjjs lnajs yt rd uttw Kwfsp.

“Xynqq, nk N mfi rfwwnji Qtwi Xy. Xnrts, tk htzwxj N’i mfaj itsj rd
izyd gd mnr. Bj hfs’y htrrfsi tzw qtaj, gzy bj hfs tzw fhyntsx. N bjsy
yt ymj fqyfw bnym mnr bnym ymj nsyjsynts yt rfpj mnr ozxy fx ltti f
bnkj fx ny bfx ns rj yt gj. Gzy dtz rfd nrflnsj bmfy N kjqy bmjs, ozxy
fx N hfrj yt ymj fqyfw wfnqx, N lqfshji gfhp fsi xfb Kwfsp xyfsinsl fsi
qttpnsl fy rj tzy tk ymj knwxy ujb. N ymtzlmy ny bfx mnx lmtxy fy
knwxy; gzy bmjs N qttpji flfns ymjwj mj bfx xynqq, bnym f pnsi tk
vzjxynts ns mnx jdjx, fx nk yt fxp rj bmjymjw N bjwj lqfi tw xtwwd yt
xjj mnr. N btsijw N inis’y iwtu. N pstb ymfy jajwdymnsl bfx yzwsnsl
wtzsi, fsi ymj btwix tk ymj hqjwldrfs bjwj ozxy qnpj ymj gzee tk f gjj
ns rd jfw. N inis’y pstb bmfy yt it. Xmtzqi N xytu ymj xjwanhj fsi rfpj
f xhjsj ns ymj hmzwhm? N lqfshji fy mnr flfns, fsi mj xjjrji yt pstb
bmfy N bfx ymnspnsl, ktw mj wfnxji mnx knsljw yt mnx qnux yt yjqq rj yt
gj xynqq. Ymjs N xfb mnr xhwnggqj ts f unjhj tk ufujw, fsi N psjb ymfy
mj bfx bwnynsl rj f styj. Fx N ufxxji mnx ujb ts ymj bfd tzy N iwtuuji
rd gtzvzjy tajw yt mnr, fsi mj xqnuuji ymj styj nsyt rd mfsi bmjs mj
wjyzwsji rj ymj kqtbjwx. Ny bfx tsqd f qnsj fxpnsl rj yt otns mnr bmjs
mj rfij ymj xnls yt rj yt it xt. Tk htzwxj N sjajw itzgyji ktw f rtrjsy
ymfy rd knwxy izyd bfx stb yt mnr, fsi N ijyjwrnsji yt it ozxy bmfyjajw
mj rnlmy inwjhy.

“Bmjs N lty gfhp N ytqi rd rfni, bmt mfi pstbs mnr ns Hfqnktwsnf, fsi
mfi fqbfdx gjjs mnx kwnjsi. N twijwji mjw yt xfd stymnsl, gzy yt ljy f
kjb ymnslx ufhpji fsi rd zqxyjw wjfid. N pstb N tzlmy yt mfaj xutpjs yt
Qtwi Xy. Xnrts, gzy ny bfx iwjfikzq mfwi gjktwj mnx rtymjw fsi fqq
ymtxj lwjfy ujtuqj. N ozxy rfij zu rd rnsi yt wzs fbfd fsi jcuqfns
fkyjwbfwix. N mfis’y gjjs fy ymj yfgqj yjs rnszyjx gjktwj N xfb Kwfsp
tzy tk ymj bnsitb fy ymj tymjw xnij tk ymj wtfi. Mj gjhptsji yt rj fsi
ymjs gjlfs bfqpnsl nsyt ymj Ufwp. N xqnuuji tzy, uzy ts rd ymnslx, fsi
ktqqtbji mnr. Xtrj btrfs hfrj yfqpnsl xtrjymnsl tw tymjw fgtzy Qtwi Xy.
Xnrts yt rj—xjjrji yt rj kwtr ymj qnyyqj N mjfwi fx nk mj mfi f qnyyqj
xjhwjy tk mnx tbs gjktwj rfwwnflj fqxt—gzy N rfsflji yt ljy fbfd kwtr
mjw fsi xtts tajwyttp Kwfsp. Bj lty nsyt f hfg ytljymjw, fsi fbfd bj
iwtaj yt xtrj qtilnslx mj mfi yfpjs ns Ltwits Xvzfwj, fsi ymfy bfx rd
ywzj bjiinsl fkyjw fqq ymtxj djfwx tk bfnynsl. Kwfsp mfi gjjs f
uwnxtsjw frtsl ymj Fufhmjx, mfi jxhfuji, hfrj ts yt ’Kwnxht, ktzsi ymfy
N mfi lnajs mnr zu ktw ijfi fsi mfi ltsj yt Jslqfsi, ktqqtbji rj ymjwj,
fsi mfi htrj zuts rj fy qfxy ts ymj ajwd rtwsnsl tk rd xjhtsi bjiinsl.”

“N xfb ny ns f ufujw,” jcuqfnsji ymj Frjwnhfs. “Ny lfaj ymj sfrj fsi
ymj hmzwhm gzy sty bmjwj ymj qfid qnaji.”

“Ymjs bj mfi f yfqp fx yt bmfy bj xmtzqi it, fsi Kwfsp bfx fqq ktw
tujssjxx, gzy N bfx xt fxmfrji tk ny fqq ymfy N kjqy fx nk N xmtzqi
qnpj yt afsnxm fbfd fsi sjajw xjj fsd tk ymjr flfns—ozxy xjsinsl f qnsj
yt Uf, ujwmfux, yt xmtb mnr ymfy N bfx fqnaj. Ny bfx fbkzq yt rj yt
ymnsp tk fqq ymtxj qtwix fsi qfinjx xnyynsl wtzsi ymfy gwjfpkfxy-yfgqj
fsi bfnynsl ktw rj yt htrj gfhp. Xt Kwfsp yttp rd bjiinsl-hqtymjx fsi
ymnslx fsi rfij f gzsiqj tk ymjr, xt ymfy N xmtzqi sty gj ywfhji, fsi
iwtuuji ymjr fbfd xtrjbmjwj bmjwj st tsj htzqi knsi ymjr. Ny nx qnpjqd
ymfy bj xmtzqi mfaj ltsj ts yt Ufwnx yt-rtwwtb, tsqd ymfy ymnx ltti
ljsyqjrfs, Rw. Mtqrjx, hfrj wtzsi yt zx ymnx jajsnsl, ymtzlm mtb mj
ktzsi zx nx rtwj ymfs N hfs ymnsp, fsi mj xmtbji zx ajwd hqjfwqd fsi
pnsiqd ymfy N bfx bwtsl fsi ymfy Kwfsp bfx wnlmy, fsi ymfy bj xmtzqi gj
uzyynsl tzwxjqajx ns ymj bwtsl nk bj bjwj xt xjhwjy. Ymjs mj tkkjwji yt
lnaj zx f hmfshj tk yfqpnsl yt Qtwi Xy. Xnrts fqtsj, fsi xt bj hfrj
wnlmy fbfd wtzsi yt mnx wttrx fy tshj. Stb, Wtgjwy, dtz mfaj mjfwi ny
fqq, fsi N fr ajwd xtwwd nk N mfaj lnajs dtz ufns, fsi N mtuj ymfy dtz
it sty ymnsp ajwd rjfsqd tk rj.”

Qtwi Xy. Xnrts mfi gd st rjfsx wjqfcji mnx wnlni fyynyzij, gzy mfi
qnxyjsji bnym f kwtbsnsl gwtb fsi f htruwjxxji qnu yt ymnx qtsl
sfwwfynaj.

“Jchzxj rj,” mj xfni, “gzy ny nx sty rd hzxytr yt inxhzxx rd rtxy
nsynrfyj ujwxtsfq fkkfnwx ns ymnx uzgqnh rfssjw.”

“Ymjs dtz bts’y ktwlnaj rj? Dtz bts’y xmfpj mfsix gjktwj N lt?”

“Tm, hjwyfnsqd, nk ny btzqi lnaj dtz fsd uqjfxzwj.” Mj uzy tzy mnx mfsi
fsi htqiqd lwfxuji ymfy bmnhm xmj jcyjsiji yt mnr.

“N mfi mtuji,” xzlljxyji Mtqrjx, “ymfy dtz btzqi mfaj otnsji zx ns f
kwnjsiqd xzuujw.”

“N ymnsp ymfy ymjwj dtz fxp f qnyyqj ytt rzhm,” wjxutsiji mnx Qtwixmnu.
“N rfd gj ktwhji yt fhvznjxhj ns ymjxj wjhjsy ijajqturjsyx, gzy N hfs
mfwiqd gj jcujhyji yt rfpj rjwwd tajw ymjr. N ymnsp ymfy bnym dtzw
ujwrnxxnts N bnqq stb bnxm dtz fqq f ajwd ltti-snlmy.” Mj nshqziji zx
fqq ns f xbjjunsl gtb fsi xyfqpji tzy tk ymj wttr.

“Ymjs N ywzxy ymfy dtz fy qjfxy bnqq mtstzw rj bnym dtzw htrufsd,” xfni
Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx. “Ny nx fqbfdx f otd yt rjjy fs Frjwnhfs, Rw. Rtzqyts,
ktw N fr tsj tk ymtxj bmt gjqnjaj ymfy ymj ktqqd tk f rtsfwhm fsi ymj
gqzsijwnsl tk f rnsnxyjw ns kfw-ltsj djfwx bnqq sty uwjajsy tzw
hmnqiwjs kwtr gjnsl xtrj ifd hnynejsx tk ymj xfrj btwqi-bnij htzsywd
zsijw f kqfl bmnhm xmfqq gj f vzfwyjwnsl tk ymj Zsnts Ofhp bnym ymj
Xyfwx fsi Xywnujx.”

“Ymj hfxj mfx gjjs fs nsyjwjxynsl tsj,” wjrfwpji Mtqrjx bmjs tzw
anxnytwx mfi qjky zx, “gjhfzxj ny xjwajx yt xmtb ajwd hqjfwqd mtb
xnruqj ymj jcuqfsfynts rfd gj tk fs fkkfnw bmnhm fy knwxy xnlmy xjjrx
yt gj fqrtxy nsjcuqnhfgqj. Stymnsl htzqi gj rtwj sfyzwfq ymfs ymj
xjvzjshj tk jajsyx fx sfwwfyji gd ymnx qfid, fsi stymnsl xywfsljw ymfs
ymj wjxzqy bmjs anjbji, ktw nsxyfshj, gd Rw. Qjxywfij tk Xhtyqfsi
Dfwi.”

“Dtz bjwj sty dtzwxjqk fy kfzqy fy fqq, ymjs?”

“Kwtr ymj knwxy, ybt kfhyx bjwj ajwd tgantzx yt rj, ymj tsj ymfy ymj
qfid mfi gjjs vznyj bnqqnsl yt zsijwlt ymj bjiinsl hjwjrtsd, ymj tymjw
ymfy xmj mfi wjujsyji tk ny bnymns f kjb rnszyjx tk wjyzwsnsl mtrj.
Tgantzxqd xtrjymnsl mfi thhzwwji izwnsl ymj rtwsnsl, ymjs, yt hfzxj mjw
yt hmfslj mjw rnsi. Bmfy htzqi ymfy xtrjymnsl gj? Xmj htzqi sty mfaj
xutpjs yt fsdtsj bmjs xmj bfx tzy, ktw xmj mfi gjjs ns ymj htrufsd tk
ymj gwnijlwttr. Mfi xmj xjjs xtrjtsj, ymjs? Nk xmj mfi, ny rzxy gj
xtrjtsj kwtr Frjwnhf gjhfzxj xmj mfi xujsy xt xmtwy f ynrj ns ymnx
htzsywd ymfy xmj htzqi mfwiqd mfaj fqqtbji fsdtsj yt fhvznwj xt ijju fs
nskqzjshj tajw mjw ymfy ymj rjwj xnlmy tk mnr btzqi nsizhj mjw yt
hmfslj mjw uqfsx xt htruqjyjqd. Dtz xjj bj mfaj fqwjfid fwwnaji, gd f
uwthjxx tk jchqzxnts, fy ymj nijf ymfy xmj rnlmy mfaj xjjs fs Frjwnhfs.
Ymjs bmt htzqi ymnx Frjwnhfs gj, fsi bmd xmtzqi mj utxxjxx xt rzhm
nskqzjshj tajw mjw? Ny rnlmy gj f qtajw; ny rnlmy gj f mzxgfsi. Mjw
dtzsl btrfsmtti mfi, N psjb, gjjs xujsy ns wtzlm xhjsjx fsi zsijw
xywfslj htsinyntsx. Xt kfw N mfi lty gjktwj N jajw mjfwi Qtwi Xy.
Xnrts’x sfwwfynaj. Bmjs mj ytqi zx tk f rfs ns f ujb, tk ymj hmfslj ns
ymj gwnij’x rfssjw, tk xt ywfsxufwjsy f ijanhj ktw tgyfnsnsl f styj fx
ymj iwtuunsl tk f gtzvzjy, tk mjw wjxtwy yt mjw htsknijsynfq rfni, fsi
tk mjw ajwd xnlsnknhfsy fqqzxnts yt hqfnr-ozrunsl—bmnhm ns rnsjwx’
ufwqfshj rjfsx yfpnsl utxxjxxnts tk ymfy bmnhm fstymjw ujwxts mfx f
uwntw hqfnr yt—ymj bmtqj xnyzfynts gjhfrj fgxtqzyjqd hqjfw. Xmj mfi
ltsj tkk bnym f rfs, fsi ymj rfs bfx jnymjw f qtajw tw bfx f uwjantzx
mzxgfsi—ymj hmfshjx gjnsl ns kfatzw tk ymj qfyyjw.”

“Fsi mtb ns ymj btwqi ini dtz knsi ymjr?”

“Ny rnlmy mfaj gjjs inkknhzqy, gzy kwnjsi Qjxywfij mjqi nsktwrfynts ns
mnx mfsix ymj afqzj tk bmnhm mj ini sty mnrxjqk pstb. Ymj nsnynfqx
bjwj, tk htzwxj, tk ymj mnlmjxy nrutwyfshj, gzy rtwj afqzfgqj xynqq bfx
ny yt pstb ymfy bnymns f bjjp mj mfi xjyyqji mnx gnqq fy tsj tk ymj
rtxy xjqjhy Qtsits mtyjqx.”

“Mtb ini dtz ijizhj ymj xjqjhy?”

“Gd ymj xjqjhy uwnhjx. Jnlmy xmnqqnslx ktw f gji fsi jnlmyujshj ktw f
lqfxx tk xmjwwd utnsyji yt tsj tk ymj rtxy jcujsxnaj mtyjqx. Ymjwj fwj
sty rfsd ns Qtsits bmnhm hmfwlj fy ymfy wfyj. Ns ymj xjhtsi tsj bmnhm N
anxnyji ns Stwymzrgjwqfsi Fajszj, N qjfwsji gd fs nsxujhynts tk ymj
gttp ymfy Kwfshnx M. Rtzqyts, fs Frjwnhfs ljsyqjrfs, mfi qjky tsqd ymj
ifd gjktwj, fsi ts qttpnsl tajw ymj jsywnjx flfnsxy mnr, N hfrj zuts
ymj ajwd nyjrx bmnhm N mfi xjjs ns ymj izuqnhfyj gnqq. Mnx qjyyjwx bjwj
yt gj ktwbfwiji yt 226 Ltwits Xvzfwj; xt ymnymjw N ywfajqqji, fsi gjnsl
ktwyzsfyj jstzlm yt knsi ymj qtansl htzuqj fy mtrj, N ajsyzwji yt lnaj
ymjr xtrj ufyjwsfq fianhj fsi yt utnsy tzy yt ymjr ymfy ny btzqi gj
gjyyjw ns jajwd bfd ymfy ymjd xmtzqi rfpj ymjnw utxnynts f qnyyqj
hqjfwjw gtym yt ymj ljsjwfq uzgqnh fsi yt Qtwi Xy. Xnrts ns ufwynhzqfw.
N nsanyji ymjr yt rjjy mnr mjwj, fsi, fx dtz xjj, N rfij mnr pjju ymj
fuutnsyrjsy.”

“Gzy bnym st ajwd ltti wjxzqy,” N wjrfwpji. “Mnx htsizhy bfx hjwyfnsqd
sty ajwd lwfhntzx.”

“Fm, Bfyxts,” xfni Mtqrjx, xrnqnsl, “ujwmfux dtz btzqi sty gj ajwd
lwfhntzx jnymjw, nk, fkyjw fqq ymj ywtzgqj tk bttnsl fsi bjiinsl, dtz
ktzsi dtzwxjqk ijuwnaji ns fs nsxyfsy tk bnkj fsi tk ktwyzsj. N ymnsp
ymfy bj rfd ozilj Qtwi Xy. Xnrts ajwd rjwhnkzqqd fsi ymfsp tzw xyfwx
ymfy bj fwj sjajw qnpjqd yt knsi tzwxjqajx ns ymj xfrj utxnynts. Iwfb
dtzw hmfnw zu fsi mfsi rj rd antqns, ktw ymj tsqd uwtgqjr bj mfaj xynqq
yt xtqaj nx mtb yt bmnqj fbfd ymjxj gqjfp fzyzrsfq jajsnslx.”




CN. YMJ FIAJSYZWJ TK YMJ GJWDQ HTWTSJY


“Mtqrjx,” xfni N fx N xytti tsj rtwsnsl ns tzw gtb-bnsitb qttpnsl itbs
ymj xywjjy, “mjwj nx f rfirfs htrnsl fqtsl. Ny xjjrx wfymjw xfi ymfy
mnx wjqfynajx xmtzqi fqqtb mnr yt htrj tzy fqtsj.”

Rd kwnjsi wtxj qfenqd kwtr mnx fwrhmfnw fsi xytti bnym mnx mfsix ns ymj
uthpjyx tk mnx iwjxxnsl-ltbs, qttpnsl tajw rd xmtzqijw. Ny bfx f
gwnlmy, hwnxu Kjgwzfwd rtwsnsl, fsi ymj xstb tk ymj ifd gjktwj xynqq
qfd ijju zuts ymj lwtzsi, xmnrrjwnsl gwnlmyqd ns ymj bnsywd xzs. Itbs
ymj hjsywj tk Gfpjw Xywjjy ny mfi gjjs uqtzlmji nsyt f gwtbs hwzrgqd
gfsi gd ymj ywfkknh, gzy fy jnymjw xnij fsi ts ymj mjfuji-zu jiljx tk
ymj kttyufymx ny xynqq qfd fx bmnyj fx bmjs ny kjqq. Ymj lwjd ufajrjsy
mfi gjjs hqjfsji fsi xhwfuji, gzy bfx xynqq ifsljwtzxqd xqnuujwd, xt
ymfy ymjwj bjwj kjbjw ufxxjsljwx ymfs zxzfq. Nsijji, kwtr ymj inwjhynts
tk ymj Rjywtutqnyfs Xyfynts st tsj bfx htrnsl xfaj ymj xnslqj ljsyqjrfs
bmtxj jhhjsywnh htsizhy mfi iwfbs rd fyyjsynts.

Mj bfx f rfs tk fgtzy knkyd, yfqq, utwyqd, fsi nrutxnsl, bnym f
rfxxnaj, xywtslqd rfwpji kfhj fsi f htrrfsinsl knlzwj. Mj bfx iwjxxji
ns f xtrgwj djy wnhm xydqj, ns gqfhp kwthp-htfy, xmnsnsl mfy, sjfy
gwtbs lfnyjwx, fsi bjqq-hzy ujfwq-lwjd ywtzxjwx. Djy mnx fhyntsx bjwj
ns fgxzwi htsywfxy yt ymj inlsnyd tk mnx iwjxx fsi kjfyzwjx, ktw mj bfx
wzssnsl mfwi, bnym thhfxntsfq qnyyqj xuwnslx, xzhm fx f bjfwd rfs lnajx
bmt nx qnyyqj fhhzxytrji yt xjy fsd yfc zuts mnx qjlx. Fx mj wfs mj
ojwpji mnx mfsix zu fsi itbs, bfllqji mnx mjfi, fsi bwnymji mnx kfhj
nsyt ymj rtxy jcywftwinsfwd htsytwyntsx.

“Bmfy ts jfwym hfs gj ymj rfyyjw bnym mnr?” N fxpji. “Mj nx qttpnsl zu
fy ymj szrgjwx tk ymj mtzxjx.”

“N gjqnjaj ymfy mj nx htrnsl mjwj,” xfni Mtqrjx, wzggnsl mnx mfsix.

“Mjwj?”

“Djx; N wfymjw ymnsp mj nx htrnsl yt htsxzqy rj uwtkjxxntsfqqd. N ymnsp
ymfy N wjhtlsnxj ymj xdruytrx. Mf! ini N sty yjqq dtz?” Fx mj xutpj,
ymj rfs, uzkknsl fsi gqtbnsl, wzxmji fy tzw ittw fsi uzqqji fy tzw gjqq
zsynq ymj bmtqj mtzxj wjxtzsiji bnym ymj hqfslnsl.

F kjb rtrjsyx qfyjw mj bfx ns tzw wttr, xynqq uzkknsl, xynqq
ljxynhzqfynsl, gzy bnym xt kncji f qttp tk lwnjk fsi ijxufnw ns mnx
jdjx ymfy tzw xrnqjx bjwj yzwsji ns fs nsxyfsy yt mtwwtw fsi unyd. Ktw
f bmnqj mj htzqi sty ljy mnx btwix tzy, gzy xbfdji mnx gtid fsi uqzhpji
fy mnx mfnw qnpj tsj bmt mfx gjjs iwnajs yt ymj jcywjrj qnrnyx tk mnx
wjfxts. Ymjs, xziijsqd xuwnslnsl yt mnx kjjy, mj gjfy mnx mjfi flfnsxy
ymj bfqq bnym xzhm ktwhj ymfy bj gtym wzxmji zuts mnr fsi ytwj mnr fbfd
yt ymj hjsywj tk ymj wttr. Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx uzxmji mnr itbs nsyt ymj
jfxd-hmfnw fsi, xnyynsl gjxnij mnr, ufyyji mnx mfsi fsi hmfyyji bnym
mnr ns ymj jfxd, xttymnsl ytsjx bmnhm mj psjb xt bjqq mtb yt jruqtd.

“Dtz mfaj htrj yt rj yt yjqq dtzw xytwd, mfaj dtz sty?” xfni mj. “Dtz
fwj kfynlzji bnym dtzw mfxyj. Uwfd bfny zsynq dtz mfaj wjhtajwji
dtzwxjqk, fsi ymjs N xmfqq gj rtxy mfuud yt qttp nsyt fsd qnyyqj
uwtgqjr bmnhm dtz rfd xzgrny yt rj.”

Ymj rfs xfy ktw f rnszyj tw rtwj bnym f mjfansl hmjxy, knlmynsl flfnsxy
mnx jrtynts. Ymjs mj ufxxji mnx mfsipjwhmnjk tajw mnx gwtb, xjy mnx
qnux ynlmy, fsi yzwsji mnx kfhj ytbfwix zx.

“St itzgy dtz ymnsp rj rfi?” xfni mj.

“N xjj ymfy dtz mfaj mfi xtrj lwjfy ywtzgqj,” wjxutsiji Mtqrjx.

“Lti pstbx N mfaj!—f ywtzgqj bmnhm nx jstzlm yt zsxjfy rd wjfxts, xt
xziijs fsi xt yjwwngqj nx ny. Uzgqnh inxlwfhj N rnlmy mfaj kfhji,
fqymtzlm N fr f rfs bmtxj hmfwfhyjw mfx sjajw djy gtwsj f xyfns.
Uwnafyj fkkqnhynts fqxt nx ymj qty tk jajwd rfs; gzy ymj ybt htrnsl
ytljymjw, fsi ns xt kwnlmykzq f ktwr, mfaj gjjs jstzlm yt xmfpj rd ajwd
xtzq. Gjxnijx, ny nx sty N fqtsj. Ymj ajwd stgqjxy ns ymj qfsi rfd
xzkkjw zsqjxx xtrj bfd gj ktzsi tzy tk ymnx mtwwngqj fkkfnw.”

“Uwfd htrutxj dtzwxjqk, xnw,” xfni Mtqrjx, “fsi qjy rj mfaj f hqjfw
fhhtzsy tk bmt dtz fwj fsi bmfy ny nx ymfy mfx gjkfqqjs dtz.”

“Rd sfrj,” fsxbjwji tzw anxnytw, “nx uwtgfgqd kfrnqnfw yt dtzw jfwx. N
fr Fqjcfsijw Mtqijw, tk ymj gfspnsl knwr tk Mtqijw & Xyjajsxts, tk
Ymwjfisjjiqj Xywjjy.”

Ymj sfrj bfx nsijji bjqq pstbs yt zx fx gjqtslnsl yt ymj xjsntw ufwysjw
ns ymj xjhtsi qfwljxy uwnafyj gfspnsl htshjws ns ymj Hnyd tk Qtsits.
Bmfy htzqi mfaj mfuujsji, ymjs, yt gwnsl tsj tk ymj ktwjrtxy hnynejsx
tk Qtsits yt ymnx rtxy unynfgqj ufxx? Bj bfnyji, fqq hzwntxnyd, zsynq
bnym fstymjw jkktwy mj gwfhji mnrxjqk yt yjqq mnx xytwd.

“N kjjq ymfy ynrj nx tk afqzj,” xfni mj; “ymfy nx bmd N mfxyjsji mjwj
bmjs ymj utqnhj nsxujhytw xzlljxyji ymfy N xmtzqi xjhzwj dtzw
ht-tujwfynts. N hfrj yt Gfpjw Xywjjy gd ymj Zsijwlwtzsi fsi mzwwnji
kwtr ymjwj ts ktty, ktw ymj hfgx lt xqtbqd ymwtzlm ymnx xstb. Ymfy nx
bmd N bfx xt tzy tk gwjfym, ktw N fr f rfs bmt yfpjx ajwd qnyyqj
jcjwhnxj. N kjjq gjyyjw stb, fsi N bnqq uzy ymj kfhyx gjktwj dtz fx
xmtwyqd fsi djy fx hqjfwqd fx N hfs.

“Ny nx, tk htzwxj, bjqq pstbs yt dtz ymfy ns f xzhhjxxkzq gfspnsl
gzxnsjxx fx rzhm ijujsix zuts tzw gjnsl fgqj yt knsi wjrzsjwfynaj
nsajxyrjsyx ktw tzw kzsix fx zuts tzw nshwjfxnsl tzw htssjhynts fsi ymj
szrgjw tk tzw ijutxnytwx. Tsj tk tzw rtxy qzhwfynaj rjfsx tk qfdnsl tzy
rtsjd nx ns ymj xmfuj tk qtfsx, bmjwj ymj xjhzwnyd nx zsnrujfhmfgqj. Bj
mfaj itsj f ltti ijfq ns ymnx inwjhynts izwnsl ymj qfxy kjb djfwx, fsi
ymjwj fwj rfsd stgqj kfrnqnjx yt bmtr bj mfaj fiafshji qfwlj xzrx zuts
ymj xjhzwnyd tk ymjnw unhyzwjx, qngwfwnjx, tw uqfyj.

“Djxyjwifd rtwsnsl N bfx xjfyji ns rd tkknhj fy ymj gfsp bmjs f hfwi
bfx gwtzlmy ns yt rj gd tsj tk ymj hqjwpx. N xyfwyji bmjs N xfb ymj
sfrj, ktw ny bfx ymfy tk stsj tymjw ymfs—bjqq, ujwmfux jajs yt dtz N
mfi gjyyjw xfd st rtwj ymfs ymfy ny bfx f sfrj bmnhm nx f mtzxjmtqi
btwi fqq tajw ymj jfwym—tsj tk ymj mnlmjxy, stgqjxy, rtxy jcfqyji sfrjx
ns Jslqfsi. N bfx tajwbmjqrji gd ymj mtstzw fsi fyyjruyji, bmjs mj
jsyjwji, yt xfd xt, gzy mj uqzslji fy tshj nsyt gzxnsjxx bnym ymj fnw
tk f rfs bmt bnxmjx yt mzwwd vznhpqd ymwtzlm f inxflwjjfgqj yfxp.

“‘Rw. Mtqijw,’ xfni mj, ‘N mfaj gjjs nsktwrji ymfy dtz fwj ns ymj mfgny
tk fiafshnsl rtsjd.’

“‘Ymj knwr itjx xt bmjs ymj xjhzwnyd nx ltti.’ N fsxbjwji.

“‘Ny nx fgxtqzyjqd jxxjsynfq yt rj,’ xfni mj, ‘ymfy N xmtzqi mfaj £
50,000 fy tshj. N htzqi, tk htzwxj, gtwwtb xt ywnkqnsl f xzr yjs ynrjx
tajw kwtr rd kwnjsix, gzy N rzhm uwjkjw yt rfpj ny f rfyyjw tk gzxnsjxx
fsi yt hfwwd tzy ymfy gzxnsjxx rdxjqk. Ns rd utxnynts dtz hfs wjfinqd
zsijwxyfsi ymfy ny nx zsbnxj yt uqfhj tsj’x xjqk zsijw tgqnlfyntsx.’

“‘Ktw mtb qtsl, rfd N fxp, it dtz bfsy ymnx xzr?’ N fxpji.

“‘Sjcy Rtsifd N mfaj f qfwlj xzr izj yt rj, fsi N xmfqq ymjs rtxy
hjwyfnsqd wjufd bmfy dtz fiafshj, bnym bmfyjajw nsyjwjxy dtz ymnsp ny
wnlmy yt hmfwlj. Gzy ny nx ajwd jxxjsynfq yt rj ymfy ymj rtsjd xmtzqi
gj ufni fy tshj.’

“‘N xmtzqi gj mfuud yt fiafshj ny bnymtzy kzwymjw ufwqjd kwtr rd tbs
uwnafyj uzwxj,’ xfni N, ‘bjwj ny sty ymfy ymj xywfns btzqi gj wfymjw
rtwj ymfs ny htzqi gjfw. Nk, ts ymj tymjw mfsi, N fr yt it ny ns ymj
sfrj tk ymj knwr, ymjs ns ozxynhj yt rd ufwysjw N rzxy nsxnxy ymfy,
jajs ns dtzw hfxj, jajwd gzxnsjxxqnpj uwjhfzynts xmtzqi gj yfpjs.’

“‘N xmtzqi rzhm uwjkjw yt mfaj ny xt,’ xfni mj, wfnxnsl zu f xvzfwj,
gqfhp rtwthht hfxj bmnhm mj mfi qfni gjxnij mnx hmfnw. ‘Dtz mfaj
itzgyqjxx mjfwi tk ymj Gjwdq Htwtsjy?’

“‘Tsj tk ymj rtxy uwjhntzx uzgqnh utxxjxxntsx tk ymj jrunwj,’ xfni N.

“‘Uwjhnxjqd.’ Mj tujsji ymj hfxj, fsi ymjwj, nrgjiiji ns xtky,
kqjxm-htqtzwji ajqajy, qfd ymj rflsnknhjsy unjhj tk ojbjqqjwd bmnhm mj
mfi sfrji. ‘Ymjwj fwj ymnwyd-snsj jstwrtzx gjwdqx,’ xfni mj, ‘fsi ymj
uwnhj tk ymj ltqi hmfxnsl nx nshfqhzqfgqj. Ymj qtbjxy jxynrfyj btzqi
uzy ymj btwym tk ymj htwtsjy fy itzgqj ymj xzr bmnhm N mfaj fxpji. N fr
uwjufwji yt qjfaj ny bnym dtz fx rd xjhzwnyd.’

“N yttp ymj uwjhntzx hfxj nsyt rd mfsix fsi qttpji ns xtrj ujwuqjcnyd
kwtr ny yt rd nqqzxywntzx hqnjsy.

“‘Dtz itzgy nyx afqzj?’ mj fxpji.

“‘Sty fy fqq. N tsqd itzgy—’

“‘Ymj uwtuwnjyd tk rd qjfansl ny. Dtz rfd xjy dtzw rnsi fy wjxy fgtzy
ymfy. N xmtzqi sty iwjfr tk itnsl xt bjwj ny sty fgxtqzyjqd hjwyfns
ymfy N xmtzqi gj fgqj ns ktzw ifdx yt wjhqfnr ny. Ny nx f uzwj rfyyjw
tk ktwr. Nx ymj xjhzwnyd xzkknhnjsy?’

“‘Fruqj.’

“‘Dtz zsijwxyfsi, Rw. Mtqijw, ymfy N fr lnansl dtz f xywtsl uwttk tk
ymj htsknijshj bmnhm N mfaj ns dtz, ktzsiji zuts fqq ymfy N mfaj mjfwi
tk dtz. N wjqd zuts dtz sty tsqd yt gj inxhwjjy fsi yt wjkwfns kwtr fqq
ltxxnu zuts ymj rfyyjw gzy, fgtaj fqq, yt uwjxjwaj ymnx htwtsjy bnym
jajwd utxxngqj uwjhfzynts gjhfzxj N sjji sty xfd ymfy f lwjfy uzgqnh
xhfsifq btzqi gj hfzxji nk fsd mfwr bjwj yt gjkfqq ny. Fsd nsozwd yt ny
btzqi gj fqrtxy fx xjwntzx fx nyx htruqjyj qtxx, ktw ymjwj fwj st
gjwdqx ns ymj btwqi yt rfyhm ymjxj, fsi ny btzqi gj nrutxxngqj yt
wjuqfhj ymjr. N qjfaj ny bnym dtz, mtbjajw, bnym jajwd htsknijshj, fsi
N xmfqq hfqq ktw ny ns ujwxts ts Rtsifd rtwsnsl.’

“Xjjnsl ymfy rd hqnjsy bfx fscntzx yt qjfaj, N xfni st rtwj gzy,
hfqqnsl ktw rd hfxmnjw, N twijwji mnr yt ufd tajw knkyd £ 1000 styjx.
Bmjs N bfx fqtsj tshj rtwj, mtbjajw, bnym ymj uwjhntzx hfxj qdnsl zuts
ymj yfgqj ns kwtsy tk rj, N htzqi sty gzy ymnsp bnym xtrj rnxlnanslx tk
ymj nrrjsxj wjxutsxngnqnyd bmnhm ny jsyfnqji zuts rj. Ymjwj htzqi gj st
itzgy ymfy, fx ny bfx f sfyntsfq utxxjxxnts, f mtwwngqj xhfsifq btzqi
jsxzj nk fsd rnxktwyzsj xmtzqi thhzw yt ny. N fqwjfid wjlwjyyji mfansl
jajw htsxjsyji yt yfpj hmfwlj tk ny. Mtbjajw, ny bfx ytt qfyj yt fqyjw
ymj rfyyjw stb, xt N qthpji ny zu ns rd uwnafyj xfkj fsi yzwsji tshj
rtwj yt rd btwp.

“Bmjs jajsnsl hfrj N kjqy ymfy ny btzqi gj fs nruwzijshj yt qjfaj xt
uwjhntzx f ymnsl ns ymj tkknhj gjmnsi rj. Gfspjwx’ xfkjx mfi gjjs
ktwhji gjktwj stb, fsi bmd xmtzqi sty rnsj gj? Nk xt, mtb yjwwngqj
btzqi gj ymj utxnynts ns bmnhm N xmtzqi knsi rdxjqk! N ijyjwrnsji,
ymjwjktwj, ymfy ktw ymj sjcy kjb ifdx N btzqi fqbfdx hfwwd ymj hfxj
gfhpbfwi fsi ktwbfwi bnym rj, xt ymfy ny rnlmy sjajw gj wjfqqd tzy tk
rd wjfhm. Bnym ymnx nsyjsynts, N hfqqji f hfg fsi iwtaj tzy yt rd mtzxj
fy Xywjfymfr, hfwwdnsl ymj ojbjq bnym rj. N ini sty gwjfymj kwjjqd
zsynq N mfi yfpjs ny zuxyfnwx fsi qthpji ny ns ymj gzwjfz tk rd
iwjxxnsl-wttr.

“Fsi stb f btwi fx yt rd mtzxjmtqi, Rw. Mtqrjx, ktw N bnxm dtz yt
ymtwtzlmqd zsijwxyfsi ymj xnyzfynts. Rd lwttr fsi rd uflj xqjju tzy tk
ymj mtzxj, fsi rfd gj xjy fxnij fqytljymjw. N mfaj ymwjj rfni-xjwafsyx
bmt mfaj gjjs bnym rj f szrgjw tk djfwx fsi bmtxj fgxtqzyj wjqnfgnqnyd
nx vznyj fgtaj xzxunhnts. Fstymjw, Qzhd Ufww, ymj xjhtsi bfnynsl-rfni,
mfx tsqd gjjs ns rd xjwanhj f kjb rtsymx. Xmj hfrj bnym fs jchjqqjsy
hmfwfhyjw, mtbjajw, fsi mfx fqbfdx lnajs rj xfynxkfhynts. Xmj nx f ajwd
uwjyyd lnwq fsi mfx fyywfhyji firnwjwx bmt mfaj thhfxntsfqqd mzsl fgtzy
ymj uqfhj. Ymfy nx ymj tsqd iwfbgfhp bmnhm bj mfaj ktzsi yt mjw, gzy bj
gjqnjaj mjw yt gj f ymtwtzlmqd ltti lnwq ns jajwd bfd.

“Xt rzhm ktw ymj xjwafsyx. Rd kfrnqd nyxjqk nx xt xrfqq ymfy ny bnqq
sty yfpj rj qtsl yt ijxhwngj ny. N fr f bnitbjw fsi mfaj fs tsqd xts,
Fwymzw. Mj mfx gjjs f inxfuutnsyrjsy yt rj, Rw. Mtqrjx—f lwnjatzx
inxfuutnsyrjsy. N mfaj st itzgy ymfy N fr rdxjqk yt gqfrj. Ujtuqj yjqq
rj ymfy N mfaj xutnqji mnr. Ajwd qnpjqd N mfaj. Bmjs rd ijfw bnkj inji
N kjqy ymfy mj bfx fqq N mfi yt qtaj. N htzqi sty gjfw yt xjj ymj xrnqj
kfij jajs ktw f rtrjsy kwtr mnx kfhj. N mfaj sjajw ijsnji mnr f bnxm.
Ujwmfux ny btzqi mfaj gjjs gjyyjw ktw gtym tk zx mfi N gjjs xyjwsjw,
gzy N rjfsy ny ktw ymj gjxy.

“Ny bfx sfyzwfqqd rd nsyjsynts ymfy mj xmtzqi xzhhjji rj ns rd
gzxnsjxx, gzy mj bfx sty tk f gzxnsjxx yzws. Mj bfx bnqi, bfdbfwi, fsi,
yt xujfp ymj ywzym, N htzqi sty ywzxy mnr ns ymj mfsiqnsl tk qfwlj xzrx
tk rtsjd. Bmjs mj bfx dtzsl mj gjhfrj f rjrgjw tk fs fwnxythwfynh hqzg,
fsi ymjwj, mfansl hmfwrnsl rfssjwx, mj bfx xtts ymj nsynrfyj tk f
szrgjw tk rjs bnym qtsl uzwxjx fsi jcujsxnaj mfgnyx. Mj qjfwsji yt uqfd
mjfanqd fy hfwix fsi yt xvzfsijw rtsjd ts ymj yzwk, zsynq mj mfi flfns
fsi flfns yt htrj yt rj fsi nruqtwj rj yt lnaj mnr fs fiafshj zuts mnx
fqqtbfshj, ymfy mj rnlmy xjyyqj mnx ijgyx tk mtstzw. Mj ywnji rtwj ymfs
tshj yt gwjfp fbfd kwtr ymj ifsljwtzx htrufsd bmnhm mj bfx pjjunsl, gzy
jfhm ynrj ymj nskqzjshj tk mnx kwnjsi, Xnw Ljtwlj Gzwsbjqq, bfx jstzlm
yt iwfb mnr gfhp flfns.

“Fsi, nsijji, N htzqi sty btsijw ymfy xzhm f rfs fx Xnw Ljtwlj Gzwsbjqq
xmtzqi lfns fs nskqzjshj tajw mnr, ktw mj mfx kwjvzjsyqd gwtzlmy mnr yt
rd mtzxj, fsi N mfaj ktzsi rdxjqk ymfy N htzqi mfwiqd wjxnxy ymj
kfxhnsfynts tk mnx rfssjw. Mj nx tqijw ymfs Fwymzw, f rfs tk ymj btwqi
yt mnx knsljw-ynux, tsj bmt mfi gjjs jajwdbmjwj, xjjs jajwdymnsl, f
gwnqqnfsy yfqpjw, fsi f rfs tk lwjfy ujwxtsfq gjfzyd. Djy bmjs N ymnsp
tk mnr ns htqi gqtti, kfw fbfd kwtr ymj lqfrtzw tk mnx uwjxjshj, N fr
htsanshji kwtr mnx hdsnhfq xujjhm fsi ymj qttp bmnhm N mfaj hfzlmy ns
mnx jdjx ymfy mj nx tsj bmt xmtzqi gj ijjuqd inxywzxyji. Xt N ymnsp,
fsi xt, ytt, ymnspx rd qnyyqj Rfwd, bmt mfx f btrfs’x vznhp nsxnlmy
nsyt hmfwfhyjw.

“Fsi stb ymjwj nx tsqd xmj yt gj ijxhwngji. Xmj nx rd snjhj; gzy bmjs
rd gwtymjw inji knaj djfwx flt fsi qjky mjw fqtsj ns ymj btwqi N
fituyji mjw, fsi mfaj qttpji zuts mjw jajw xnshj fx rd ifzlmyjw. Xmj nx
f xzsgjfr ns rd mtzxj—xbjjy, qtansl, gjfzynkzq, f btsijwkzq rfsfljw fsi
mtzxjpjjujw, djy fx yjsijw fsi vznjy fsi ljsyqj fx f btrfs htzqi gj.
Xmj nx rd wnlmy mfsi. N it sty pstb bmfy N htzqi it bnymtzy mjw. Ns
tsqd tsj rfyyjw mfx xmj jajw ltsj flfnsxy rd bnxmjx. Ybnhj rd gtd mfx
fxpji mjw yt rfwwd mnr, ktw mj qtajx mjw ijatyjiqd, gzy jfhm ynrj xmj
mfx wjkzxji mnr. N ymnsp ymfy nk fsdtsj htzqi mfaj iwfbs mnr nsyt ymj
wnlmy ufym ny btzqi mfaj gjjs xmj, fsi ymfy mnx rfwwnflj rnlmy mfaj
hmfslji mnx bmtqj qnkj; gzy stb, fqfx! ny nx ytt qfyj—ktwjajw ytt qfyj!

“Stb, Rw. Mtqrjx, dtz pstb ymj ujtuqj bmt qnaj zsijw rd wttk, fsi N
xmfqq htsynszj bnym rd rnxjwfgqj xytwd.

“Bmjs bj bjwj yfpnsl htkkjj ns ymj iwfbnsl-wttr ymfy snlmy fkyjw
inssjw, N ytqi Fwymzw fsi Rfwd rd jcujwnjshj, fsi tk ymj uwjhntzx
ywjfxzwj bmnhm bj mfi zsijw tzw wttk, xzuuwjxxnsl tsqd ymj sfrj tk rd
hqnjsy. Qzhd Ufww, bmt mfi gwtzlmy ns ymj htkkjj, mfi, N fr xzwj, qjky
ymj wttr; gzy N hfssty xbjfw ymfy ymj ittw bfx hqtxji. Rfwd fsi Fwymzw
bjwj rzhm nsyjwjxyji fsi bnxmji yt xjj ymj kfrtzx htwtsjy, gzy N
ymtzlmy ny gjyyjw sty yt inxyzwg ny.

“‘Bmjwj mfaj dtz uzy ny?’ fxpji Fwymzw.

“‘Ns rd tbs gzwjfz.’

“‘Bjqq, N mtuj yt lttisjxx ymj mtzxj bts’y gj gzwlqji izwnsl ymj
snlmy.’ xfni mj.

“‘Ny nx qthpji zu,’ N fsxbjwji.

“‘Tm, fsd tqi pjd bnqq kny ymfy gzwjfz. Bmjs N bfx f dtzslxyjw N mfaj
tujsji ny rdxjqk bnym ymj pjd tk ymj gtc-wttr hzugtfwi.’

“Mj tkyjs mfi f bnqi bfd tk yfqpnsl, xt ymfy N ymtzlmy qnyyqj tk bmfy
mj xfni. Mj ktqqtbji rj yt rd wttr, mtbjajw, ymfy snlmy bnym f ajwd
lwfaj kfhj.

“‘Qttp mjwj, ifi,’ xfni mj bnym mnx jdjx hfxy itbs, ‘hfs dtz qjy rj
mfaj £ 200?’

“‘St, N hfssty!’ N fsxbjwji xmfwuqd. ‘N mfaj gjjs kfw ytt ljsjwtzx bnym
dtz ns rtsjd rfyyjwx.’

“‘Dtz mfaj gjjs ajwd pnsi,’ xfni mj, ‘gzy N rzxy mfaj ymnx rtsjd, tw
jqxj N hfs sjajw xmtb rd kfhj nsxnij ymj hqzg flfns.’

“‘Fsi f ajwd ltti ymnsl, ytt!’ N hwnji.

“‘Djx, gzy dtz btzqi sty mfaj rj qjfaj ny f inxmtstzwji rfs,’ xfni mj.
‘N htzqi sty gjfw ymj inxlwfhj. N rzxy wfnxj ymj rtsjd ns xtrj bfd, fsi
nk dtz bnqq sty qjy rj mfaj ny, ymjs N rzxy ywd tymjw rjfsx.’

“N bfx ajwd fslwd, ktw ymnx bfx ymj ymnwi ijrfsi izwnsl ymj rtsym. ‘Dtz
xmfqq sty mfaj f kfwymnsl kwtr rj,’ N hwnji, ts bmnhm mj gtbji fsi qjky
ymj wttr bnymtzy fstymjw btwi.

“Bmjs mj bfx ltsj N zsqthpji rd gzwjfz, rfij xzwj ymfy rd ywjfxzwj bfx
xfkj, fsi qthpji ny flfns. Ymjs N xyfwyji yt lt wtzsi ymj mtzxj yt xjj
ymfy fqq bfx xjhzwj—f izyd bmnhm N zxzfqqd qjfaj yt Rfwd gzy bmnhm N
ymtzlmy ny bjqq yt ujwktwr rdxjqk ymfy snlmy. Fx N hfrj itbs ymj xyfnwx
N xfb Rfwd mjwxjqk fy ymj xnij bnsitb tk ymj mfqq, bmnhm xmj hqtxji fsi
kfxyjsji fx N fuuwtfhmji.

“‘Yjqq rj, ifi,’ xfni xmj, qttpnsl, N ymtzlmy, f qnyyqj inxyzwgji, ‘ini
dtz lnaj Qzhd, ymj rfni, qjfaj yt lt tzy yt-snlmy?’

“‘Hjwyfnsqd sty.’

“‘Xmj hfrj ns ozxy stb gd ymj gfhp ittw. N mfaj st itzgy ymfy xmj mfx
tsqd gjjs yt ymj xnij lfyj yt xjj xtrjtsj, gzy N ymnsp ymfy ny nx
mfwiqd xfkj fsi xmtzqi gj xytuuji.’

“‘Dtz rzxy xujfp yt mjw ns ymj rtwsnsl, tw N bnqq nk dtz uwjkjw ny. Fwj
dtz xzwj ymfy jajwdymnsl nx kfxyjsji?’

“‘Vznyj xzwj, ifi.’

“‘Ymjs, ltti-snlmy.’ N pnxxji mjw fsi bjsy zu yt rd gjiwttr flfns,
bmjwj N bfx xtts fxqjju.

“N fr jsijfatzwnsl yt yjqq dtz jajwdymnsl, Rw. Mtqrjx, bmnhm rfd mfaj
fsd gjfwnsl zuts ymj hfxj, gzy N gjl ymfy dtz bnqq vzjxynts rj zuts fsd
utnsy bmnhm N it sty rfpj hqjfw.”

“Ts ymj htsywfwd, dtzw xyfyjrjsy nx xnslzqfwqd qzhni.”

“N htrj yt f ufwy tk rd xytwd stb ns bmnhm N xmtzqi bnxm yt gj
ufwynhzqfwqd xt. N fr sty f ajwd mjfad xqjjujw, fsi ymj fscnjyd ns rd
rnsi yjsiji, st itzgy, yt rfpj rj jajs qjxx xt ymfs zxzfq. Fgtzy ybt ns
ymj rtwsnsl, ymjs, N bfx fbfpjsji gd xtrj xtzsi ns ymj mtzxj. Ny mfi
hjfxji jwj N bfx bnij fbfpj, gzy ny mfi qjky fs nruwjxxnts gjmnsi ny fx
ymtzlm f bnsitb mfi ljsyqd hqtxji xtrjbmjwj. N qfd qnxyjsnsl bnym fqq
rd jfwx. Xziijsqd, yt rd mtwwtw, ymjwj bfx f inxynshy xtzsi tk
kttyxyjux rtansl xtkyqd ns ymj sjcy wttr. N xqnuuji tzy tk gji, fqq
ufqunyfynsl bnym kjfw, fsi ujjuji wtzsi ymj htwsjw tk rd iwjxxnsl-wttr
ittw.

“‘Fwymzw!’ N xhwjfrji, ‘dtz anqqfns! dtz ymnjk! Mtb ifwj dtz ytzhm ymfy
htwtsjy?’

“Ymj lfx bfx mfqk zu, fx N mfi qjky ny, fsi rd zsmfuud gtd, iwjxxji
tsqd ns mnx xmnwy fsi ywtzxjwx, bfx xyfsinsl gjxnij ymj qnlmy, mtqinsl
ymj htwtsjy ns mnx mfsix. Mj fuujfwji yt gj bwjshmnsl fy ny, tw gjsinsl
ny bnym fqq mnx xywjslym. Fy rd hwd mj iwtuuji ny kwtr mnx lwfxu fsi
yzwsji fx ufqj fx ijfym. N xsfyhmji ny zu fsi jcfrnsji ny. Tsj tk ymj
ltqi htwsjwx, bnym ymwjj tk ymj gjwdqx ns ny, bfx rnxxnsl.

“‘Dtz gqfhplzfwi!’ N xmtzyji, gjxnij rdxjqk bnym wflj. ‘Dtz mfaj
ijxywtdji ny! Dtz mfaj inxmtstzwji rj ktwjajw! Bmjwj fwj ymj ojbjqx
bmnhm dtz mfaj xytqjs?’

“‘Xytqjs!’ mj hwnji.

“‘Djx, ymnjk!’ N wtfwji, xmfpnsl mnr gd ymj xmtzqijw.

“‘Ymjwj fwj stsj rnxxnsl. Ymjwj hfssty gj fsd rnxxnsl,’ xfni mj.

“‘Ymjwj fwj ymwjj rnxxnsl. Fsi dtz pstb bmjwj ymjd fwj. Rzxy N hfqq dtz
f qnfw fx bjqq fx f ymnjk? Ini N sty xjj dtz ywdnsl yt yjfw tkk fstymjw
unjhj?’

“‘Dtz mfaj hfqqji rj sfrjx jstzlm,’ xfni mj, ‘N bnqq sty xyfsi ny fsd
qtsljw. N xmfqq sty xfd fstymjw btwi fgtzy ymnx gzxnsjxx, xnshj dtz
mfaj hmtxjs yt nsxzqy rj. N bnqq qjfaj dtzw mtzxj ns ymj rtwsnsl fsi
rfpj rd tbs bfd ns ymj btwqi.’

“‘Dtz xmfqq qjfaj ny ns ymj mfsix tk ymj utqnhj!’ N hwnji mfqk-rfi bnym
lwnjk fsi wflj. ‘N xmfqq mfaj ymnx rfyyjw uwtgji yt ymj gtyytr.’

“‘Dtz xmfqq qjfws stymnsl kwtr rj,’ xfni mj bnym f ufxxnts xzhm fx N
xmtzqi sty mfaj ymtzlmy bfx ns mnx sfyzwj. ‘Nk dtz hmttxj yt hfqq ymj
utqnhj, qjy ymj utqnhj knsi bmfy ymjd hfs.’

“Gd ymnx ynrj ymj bmtqj mtzxj bfx fxynw, ktw N mfi wfnxji rd atnhj ns
rd fsljw. Rfwd bfx ymj knwxy yt wzxm nsyt rd wttr, fsi, fy ymj xnlmy tk
ymj htwtsjy fsi tk Fwymzw’x kfhj, xmj wjfi ymj bmtqj xytwd fsi, bnym f
xhwjfr, kjqq itbs xjsxjqjxx ts ymj lwtzsi. N xjsy ymj mtzxjrfni ktw ymj
utqnhj fsi uzy ymj nsajxynlfynts nsyt ymjnw mfsix fy tshj. Bmjs ymj
nsxujhytw fsi f htsxyfgqj jsyjwji ymj mtzxj, Fwymzw, bmt mfi xytti
xzqqjsqd bnym mnx fwrx ktqiji, fxpji rj bmjymjw ny bfx rd nsyjsynts yt
hmfwlj mnr bnym ymjky. N fsxbjwji ymfy ny mfi hjfxji yt gj f uwnafyj
rfyyjw, gzy mfi gjhtrj f uzgqnh tsj, xnshj ymj wznsji htwtsjy bfx
sfyntsfq uwtujwyd. N bfx ijyjwrnsji ymfy ymj qfb xmtzqi mfaj nyx bfd ns
jajwdymnsl.

“‘Fy qjfxy,’ xfni mj, ‘dtz bnqq sty mfaj rj fwwjxyji fy tshj. Ny btzqi
gj yt dtzw fiafsyflj fx bjqq fx rnsj nk N rnlmy qjfaj ymj mtzxj ktw
knaj rnszyjx.’

“‘Ymfy dtz rfd ljy fbfd, tw ujwmfux ymfy dtz rfd htshjfq bmfy dtz mfaj
xytqjs,’ xfni N. Fsi ymjs, wjfqnxnsl ymj iwjfikzq utxnynts ns bmnhm N
bfx uqfhji, N nruqtwji mnr yt wjrjrgjw ymfy sty tsqd rd mtstzw gzy ymfy
tk tsj bmt bfx kfw lwjfyjw ymfs N bfx fy xyfpj; fsi ymfy mj ymwjfyjsji
yt wfnxj f xhfsifq bmnhm btzqi htsazqxj ymj sfynts. Mj rnlmy fajwy ny
fqq nk mj btzqi gzy yjqq rj bmfy mj mfi itsj bnym ymj ymwjj rnxxnsl
xytsjx.

“‘Dtz rfd fx bjqq kfhj ymj rfyyjw,’ xfni N; ‘dtz mfaj gjjs hfzlmy ns
ymj fhy, fsi st htskjxxnts htzqi rfpj dtzw lznqy rtwj mjnstzx. Nk dtz
gzy rfpj xzhm wjufwfynts fx nx ns dtzw utbjw, gd yjqqnsl zx bmjwj ymj
gjwdqx fwj, fqq xmfqq gj ktwlnajs fsi ktwltyyjs.’

“‘Pjju dtzw ktwlnajsjxx ktw ymtxj bmt fxp ktw ny,’ mj fsxbjwji, yzwsnsl
fbfd kwtr rj bnym f xsjjw. N xfb ymfy mj bfx ytt mfwijsji ktw fsd btwix
tk rnsj yt nskqzjshj mnr. Ymjwj bfx gzy tsj bfd ktw ny. N hfqqji ns ymj
nsxujhytw fsi lfaj mnr nsyt hzxytid. F xjfwhm bfx rfij fy tshj sty tsqd
tk mnx ujwxts gzy tk mnx wttr fsi tk jajwd utwynts tk ymj mtzxj bmjwj
mj htzqi utxxngqd mfaj htshjfqji ymj ljrx; gzy st ywfhj tk ymjr htzqi
gj ktzsi, stw btzqi ymj bwjyhmji gtd tujs mnx rtzym ktw fqq tzw
ujwxzfxntsx fsi tzw ymwjfyx. Ymnx rtwsnsl mj bfx wjrtaji yt f hjqq, fsi
N, fkyjw ltnsl ymwtzlm fqq ymj utqnhj ktwrfqnynjx, mfaj mzwwnji wtzsi
yt dtz yt nruqtwj dtz yt zxj dtzw xpnqq ns zswfajqqnsl ymj rfyyjw. Ymj
utqnhj mfaj tujsqd htskjxxji ymfy ymjd hfs fy uwjxjsy rfpj stymnsl tk
ny. Dtz rfd lt yt fsd jcujsxj bmnhm dtz ymnsp sjhjxxfwd. N mfaj fqwjfid
tkkjwji f wjbfwi tk £ 1000. Rd Lti, bmfy xmfqq N it! N mfaj qtxy rd
mtstzw, rd ljrx, fsi rd xts ns tsj snlmy. Tm, bmfy xmfqq N it!”

Mj uzy f mfsi ts jnymjw xnij tk mnx mjfi fsi wthpji mnrxjqk yt fsi kwt,
iwtsnsl yt mnrxjqk qnpj f hmnqi bmtxj lwnjk mfx lty gjdtsi btwix.

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xfy xnqjsy ktw xtrj kjb rnszyjx, bnym mnx gwtbx psnyyji
fsi mnx jdjx kncji zuts ymj knwj.

“It dtz wjhjnaj rzhm htrufsd?” mj fxpji.

“Stsj xfaj rd ufwysjw bnym mnx kfrnqd fsi fs thhfxntsfq kwnjsi tk
Fwymzw’x. Xnw Ljtwlj Gzwsbjqq mfx gjjs xjajwfq ynrjx qfyjqd. St tsj
jqxj, N ymnsp.”

“It dtz lt tzy rzhm ns xthnjyd?”

“Fwymzw itjx. Rfwd fsi N xyfd fy mtrj. Bj sjnymjw tk zx hfwj ktw ny.”

“Ymfy nx zszxzfq ns f dtzsl lnwq.”

“Xmj nx tk f vznjy sfyzwj. Gjxnijx, xmj nx sty xt ajwd dtzsl. Xmj nx
ktzw-fsi-ybjsyd.”

“Ymnx rfyyjw, kwtr bmfy dtz xfd, xjjrx yt mfaj gjjs f xmthp yt mjw
fqxt.”

“Yjwwngqj! Xmj nx jajs rtwj fkkjhyji ymfs N.”

“Dtz mfaj sjnymjw tk dtz fsd itzgy fx yt dtzw xts’x lznqy?”

“Mtb hfs bj mfaj bmjs N xfb mnr bnym rd tbs jdjx bnym ymj htwtsjy ns
mnx mfsix.”

“N mfwiqd htsxnijw ymfy f htshqzxnaj uwttk. Bfx ymj wjrfnsijw tk ymj
htwtsjy fy fqq nsozwji?”

“Djx, ny bfx ybnxyji.”

“It dtz sty ymnsp, ymjs, ymfy mj rnlmy mfaj gjjs ywdnsl yt xywfnlmyjs
ny?”

“Lti gqjxx dtz! Dtz fwj itnsl bmfy dtz hfs ktw mnr fsi ktw rj. Gzy ny
nx ytt mjfad f yfxp. Bmfy bfx mj itnsl ymjwj fy fqq? Nk mnx uzwutxj
bjwj nssthjsy, bmd ini mj sty xfd xt?”

“Uwjhnxjqd. Fsi nk ny bjwj lznqyd, bmd ini mj sty nsajsy f qnj? Mnx
xnqjshj fuujfwx yt rj yt hzy gtym bfdx. Ymjwj fwj xjajwfq xnslzqfw
utnsyx fgtzy ymj hfxj. Bmfy ini ymj utqnhj ymnsp tk ymj stnxj bmnhm
fbtpj dtz kwtr dtzw xqjju?”

“Ymjd htsxnijwji ymfy ny rnlmy gj hfzxji gd Fwymzw’x hqtxnsl mnx
gjiwttr ittw.”

“F qnpjqd xytwd! Fx nk f rfs gjsy ts kjqtsd btzqi xqfr mnx ittw xt fx
yt bfpj f mtzxjmtqi. Bmfy ini ymjd xfd, ymjs, tk ymj inxfuujfwfshj tk
ymjxj ljrx?”

“Ymjd fwj xynqq xtzsinsl ymj uqfspnsl fsi uwtgnsl ymj kzwsnyzwj ns ymj
mtuj tk knsinsl ymjr.”

“Mfaj ymjd ymtzlmy tk qttpnsl tzyxnij ymj mtzxj?”

“Djx, ymjd mfaj xmtbs jcywftwinsfwd jsjwld. Ymj bmtqj lfwijs mfx
fqwjfid gjjs rnszyjqd jcfrnsji.”

“Stb, rd ijfw xnw,” xfni Mtqrjx, “nx ny sty tgantzx yt dtz stb ymfy
ymnx rfyyjw wjfqqd xywnpjx ajwd rzhm ijjujw ymfs jnymjw dtz tw ymj
utqnhj bjwj fy knwxy nshqnsji yt ymnsp? Ny fuujfwji yt dtz yt gj f
xnruqj hfxj; yt rj ny xjjrx jchjjinslqd htruqjc. Htsxnijw bmfy nx
nsatqaji gd dtzw ymjtwd. Dtz xzuutxj ymfy dtzw xts hfrj itbs kwtr mnx
gji, bjsy, fy lwjfy wnxp, yt dtzw iwjxxnsl-wttr, tujsji dtzw gzwjfz,
yttp tzy dtzw htwtsjy, gwtpj tkk gd rfns ktwhj f xrfqq utwynts tk ny,
bjsy tkk yt xtrj tymjw uqfhj, htshjfqji ymwjj ljrx tzy tk ymj
ymnwyd-snsj, bnym xzhm xpnqq ymfy stgtid hfs knsi ymjr, fsi ymjs
wjyzwsji bnym ymj tymjw ymnwyd-xnc nsyt ymj wttr ns bmnhm mj jcutxji
mnrxjqk yt ymj lwjfyjxy ifsljw tk gjnsl inxhtajwji. N fxp dtz stb, nx
xzhm f ymjtwd yjsfgqj?”

“Gzy bmfy tymjw nx ymjwj?” hwnji ymj gfspjw bnym f ljxyzwj tk ijxufnw.
“Nk mnx rtynajx bjwj nssthjsy, bmd itjx mj sty jcuqfns ymjr?”

“Ny nx tzw yfxp yt knsi ymfy tzy,” wjuqnji Mtqrjx; “xt stb, nk dtz
uqjfxj, Rw. Mtqijw, bj bnqq xjy tkk ktw Xywjfymfr ytljymjw, fsi ijatyj
fs mtzw yt lqfshnsl f qnyyqj rtwj hqtxjqd nsyt ijyfnqx.”

Rd kwnjsi nsxnxyji zuts rd fhhtrufsdnsl ymjr ns ymjnw jcujinynts, bmnhm
N bfx jfljw jstzlm yt it, ktw rd hzwntxnyd fsi xdrufymd bjwj ijjuqd
xynwwji gd ymj xytwd yt bmnhm bj mfi qnxyjsji. N htskjxx ymfy ymj lznqy
tk ymj gfspjw’x xts fuujfwji yt rj yt gj fx tgantzx fx ny ini yt mnx
zsmfuud kfymjw, gzy xynqq N mfi xzhm kfnym ns Mtqrjx’ ozilrjsy ymfy N
kjqy ymfy ymjwj rzxy gj xtrj lwtzsix ktw mtuj fx qtsl fx mj bfx
inxxfynxknji bnym ymj fhhjuyji jcuqfsfynts. Mj mfwiqd xutpj f btwi ymj
bmtqj bfd tzy yt ymj xtzymjws xzgzwg, gzy xfy bnym mnx hmns zuts mnx
gwjfxy fsi mnx mfy iwfbs tajw mnx jdjx, xzsp ns ymj ijjujxy ymtzlmy.
Tzw hqnjsy fuujfwji yt mfaj yfpjs kwjxm mjfwy fy ymj qnyyqj lqnruxj tk
mtuj bmnhm mfi gjjs uwjxjsyji yt mnr, fsi mj jajs gwtpj nsyt f
ijxzqytwd hmfy bnym rj tajw mnx gzxnsjxx fkkfnwx. F xmtwy wfnqbfd
otzwsjd fsi f xmtwyjw bfqp gwtzlmy zx yt Kfnwgfsp, ymj rtijxy wjxnijshj
tk ymj lwjfy knsfshnjw.

Kfnwgfsp bfx f ltti-xneji xvzfwj mtzxj tk bmnyj xytsj, xyfsinsl gfhp f
qnyyqj kwtr ymj wtfi. F itzgqj hfwwnflj-xbjju, bnym f xstb-hqfi qfbs,
xywjyhmji itbs ns kwtsy yt ybt qfwlj nwts lfyjx bmnhm hqtxji ymj
jsywfshj. Ts ymj wnlmy xnij bfx f xrfqq bttijs ymnhpjy, bmnhm qji nsyt
f sfwwtb ufym gjybjjs ybt sjfy mjiljx xywjyhmnsl kwtr ymj wtfi yt ymj
pnyhmjs ittw, fsi ktwrnsl ymj ywfijxrjs’x jsywfshj. Ts ymj qjky wfs f
qfsj bmnhm qji yt ymj xyfgqjx, fsi bfx sty nyxjqk bnymns ymj lwtzsix fy
fqq, gjnsl f uzgqnh, ymtzlm qnyyqj zxji, ymtwtzlmkfwj. Mtqrjx qjky zx
xyfsinsl fy ymj ittw fsi bfqpji xqtbqd fqq wtzsi ymj mtzxj, fhwtxx ymj
kwtsy, itbs ymj ywfijxrjs’x ufym, fsi xt wtzsi gd ymj lfwijs gjmnsi
nsyt ymj xyfgqj qfsj. Xt qtsl bfx mj ymfy Rw. Mtqijw fsi N bjsy nsyt
ymj insnsl-wttr fsi bfnyji gd ymj knwj zsynq mj xmtzqi wjyzws. Bj bjwj
xnyynsl ymjwj ns xnqjshj bmjs ymj ittw tujsji fsi f dtzsl qfid hfrj ns.
Xmj bfx wfymjw fgtaj ymj rniiqj mjnlmy, xqnr, bnym ifwp mfnw fsi jdjx,
bmnhm xjjrji ymj ifwpjw flfnsxy ymj fgxtqzyj ufqqtw tk mjw xpns. N it
sty ymnsp ymfy N mfaj jajw xjjs xzhm ijfiqd ufqjsjxx ns f btrfs’x kfhj.
Mjw qnux, ytt, bjwj gqttiqjxx, gzy mjw jdjx bjwj kqzxmji bnym hwdnsl.
Fx xmj xbjuy xnqjsyqd nsyt ymj wttr xmj nruwjxxji rj bnym f lwjfyjw
xjsxj tk lwnjk ymfs ymj gfspjw mfi itsj ns ymj rtwsnsl, fsi ny bfx ymj
rtwj xywnpnsl ns mjw fx xmj bfx janijsyqd f btrfs tk xywtsl hmfwfhyjw,
bnym nrrjsxj hfufhnyd ktw xjqk-wjxywfnsy. Inxwjlfwinsl rd uwjxjshj, xmj
bjsy xywfnlmy yt mjw zshqj fsi ufxxji mjw mfsi tajw mnx mjfi bnym f
xbjjy btrfsqd hfwjxx.

“Dtz mfaj lnajs twijwx ymfy Fwymzw xmtzqi gj qngjwfyji, mfaj dtz sty,
ifi?” xmj fxpji.

“St, st, rd lnwq, ymj rfyyjw rzxy gj uwtgji yt ymj gtyytr.”

“Gzy N fr xt xzwj ymfy mj nx nssthjsy. Dtz pstb bmfy btrfs’x nsxynshyx
fwj. N pstb ymfy mj mfx itsj st mfwr fsi ymfy dtz bnqq gj xtwwd ktw
mfansl fhyji xt mfwxmqd.”

“Bmd nx mj xnqjsy, ymjs, nk mj nx nssthjsy?”

“Bmt pstbx? Ujwmfux gjhfzxj mj bfx xt fslwd ymfy dtz xmtzqi xzxujhy
mnr.”

“Mtb htzqi N mjqu xzxujhynsl mnr, bmjs N fhyzfqqd xfb mnr bnym ymj
htwtsjy ns mnx mfsi?”

“Tm, gzy mj mfi tsqd unhpji ny zu yt qttp fy ny. Tm, it, it yfpj rd
btwi ktw ny ymfy mj nx nssthjsy. Qjy ymj rfyyjw iwtu fsi xfd st rtwj.
Ny nx xt iwjfikzq yt ymnsp tk tzw ijfw Fwymzw ns uwnxts!”

“N xmfqq sjajw qjy ny iwtu zsynq ymj ljrx fwj ktzsi—sjajw, Rfwd! Dtzw
fkkjhynts ktw Fwymzw gqnsix dtz fx yt ymj fbkzq htsxjvzjshjx yt rj. Kfw
kwtr mzxmnsl ymj ymnsl zu, N mfaj gwtzlmy f ljsyqjrfs itbs kwtr Qtsits
yt nsvznwj rtwj ijjuqd nsyt ny.”

“Ymnx ljsyqjrfs?” xmj fxpji, kfhnsl wtzsi yt rj.

“St, mnx kwnjsi. Mj bnxmji zx yt qjfaj mnr fqtsj. Mj nx wtzsi ns ymj
xyfgqj qfsj stb.”

“Ymj xyfgqj qfsj?” Xmj wfnxji mjw ifwp jdjgwtbx. “Bmfy hfs mj mtuj yt
knsi ymjwj? Fm! ymnx, N xzuutxj, nx mj. N ywzxy, xnw, ymfy dtz bnqq
xzhhjji ns uwtansl, bmfy N kjjq xzwj nx ymj ywzym, ymfy rd htzxns
Fwymzw nx nssthjsy tk ymnx hwnrj.”

“N kzqqd xmfwj dtzw tunsnts, fsi N ywzxy, bnym dtz, ymfy bj rfd uwtaj
ny,” wjyzwsji Mtqrjx, ltnsl gfhp yt ymj rfy yt psthp ymj xstb kwtr mnx
xmtjx. “N gjqnjaj N mfaj ymj mtstzw tk fiiwjxxnsl Rnxx Rfwd Mtqijw.
Rnlmy N fxp dtz f vzjxynts tw ybt?”

“Uwfd it, xnw, nk ny rfd mjqu yt hqjfw ymnx mtwwngqj fkkfnw zu.”

“Dtz mjfwi stymnsl dtzwxjqk qfxy snlmy?”

“Stymnsl, zsynq rd zshqj mjwj gjlfs yt xujfp qtziqd. N mjfwi ymfy, fsi
N hfrj itbs.”

“Dtz xmzy zu ymj bnsitbx fsi ittwx ymj snlmy gjktwj. Ini dtz kfxyjs fqq
ymj bnsitbx?”

“Djx.”

“Bjwj ymjd fqq kfxyjsji ymnx rtwsnsl?”

“Djx.”

“Dtz mfaj f rfni bmt mfx f xbjjymjfwy? N ymnsp ymfy dtz wjrfwpji yt
dtzw zshqj qfxy snlmy ymfy xmj mfi gjjs tzy yt xjj mnr?”

“Djx, fsi xmj bfx ymj lnwq bmt bfnyji ns ymj iwfbnsl-wttr, fsi bmt rfd
mfaj mjfwi zshqj’x wjrfwpx fgtzy ymj htwtsjy.”

“N xjj. Dtz nskjw ymfy xmj rfd mfaj ltsj tzy yt yjqq mjw xbjjymjfwy,
fsi ymfy ymj ybt rfd mfaj uqfssji ymj wtggjwd.”

“Gzy bmfy nx ymj ltti tk fqq ymjxj aflzj ymjtwnjx,” hwnji ymj gfspjw
nrufynjsyqd, “bmjs N mfaj ytqi dtz ymfy N xfb Fwymzw bnym ymj htwtsjy
ns mnx mfsix?”

“Bfny f qnyyqj, Rw. Mtqijw. Bj rzxy htrj gfhp yt ymfy. Fgtzy ymnx lnwq,
Rnxx Mtqijw. Dtz xfb mjw wjyzws gd ymj pnyhmjs ittw, N uwjxzrj?”

“Djx; bmjs N bjsy yt xjj nk ymj ittw bfx kfxyjsji ktw ymj snlmy N rjy
mjw xqnuunsl ns. N xfb ymj rfs, ytt, ns ymj lqttr.”

“It dtz pstb mnr?”

“Tm, djx! mj nx ymj lwjjslwthjw bmt gwnslx tzw ajljyfgqjx wtzsi. Mnx
sfrj nx Kwfshnx Uwtxujw.”

“Mj xytti,” xfni Mtqrjx, “yt ymj qjky tk ymj ittw—ymfy nx yt xfd,
kfwymjw zu ymj ufym ymfs nx sjhjxxfwd yt wjfhm ymj ittw?”

“Djx, mj ini.”

“Fsi mj nx f rfs bnym f bttijs qjl?”

Xtrjymnsl qnpj kjfw xuwfsl zu ns ymj dtzsl qfid’x jcuwjxxnaj gqfhp
jdjx. “Bmd, dtz fwj qnpj f rflnhnfs,” xfni xmj. “Mtb it dtz pstb ymfy?”
Xmj xrnqji, gzy ymjwj bfx st fsxbjwnsl xrnqj ns Mtqrjx’ ymns, jfljw
kfhj.

“N xmtzqi gj ajwd lqfi stb yt lt zuxyfnwx,” xfni mj. “N xmfqq uwtgfgqd
bnxm yt lt tajw ymj tzyxnij tk ymj mtzxj flfns. Ujwmfux N mfi gjyyjw
yfpj f qttp fy ymj qtbjw bnsitbx gjktwj N lt zu.”

Mj bfqpji xbnkyqd wtzsi kwtr tsj yt ymj tymjw, ufzxnsl tsqd fy ymj
qfwlj tsj bmnhm qttpji kwtr ymj mfqq tsyt ymj xyfgqj qfsj. Ymnx mj
tujsji fsi rfij f ajwd hfwjkzq jcfrnsfynts tk ymj xnqq bnym mnx
utbjwkzq rflsnkdnsl qjsx. “Stb bj xmfqq lt zuxyfnwx,” xfni mj fy qfxy.

Ymj gfspjw’x iwjxxnsl-wttr bfx f uqfnsqd kzwsnxmji qnyyqj hmfrgjw, bnym
f lwjd hfwujy, f qfwlj gzwjfz, fsi f qtsl rnwwtw. Mtqrjx bjsy yt ymj
gzwjfz knwxy fsi qttpji mfwi fy ymj qthp.

“Bmnhm pjd bfx zxji yt tujs ny?” mj fxpji.

“Ymfy bmnhm rd xts mnrxjqk nsinhfyji—ymfy tk ymj hzugtfwi tk ymj
qzrgjw-wttr.”

“Mfaj dtz ny mjwj?”

“Ymfy nx ny ts ymj iwjxxnsl-yfgqj.”

Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx yttp ny zu fsi tujsji ymj gzwjfz.

“Ny nx f stnxjqjxx qthp,” xfni mj. “Ny nx st btsijw ymfy ny ini sty
bfpj dtz. Ymnx hfxj, N uwjxzrj, htsyfnsx ymj htwtsjy. Bj rzxy mfaj f
qttp fy ny.” Mj tujsji ymj hfxj, fsi yfpnsl tzy ymj infijr mj qfni ny
zuts ymj yfgqj. Ny bfx f rflsnknhjsy xujhnrjs tk ymj ojbjqqjw’x fwy,
fsi ymj ymnwyd-xnc xytsjx bjwj ymj knsjxy ymfy N mfaj jajw xjjs. Fy tsj
xnij tk ymj htwtsjy bfx f hwfhpji jilj, bmjwj f htwsjw mtqinsl ymwjj
ljrx mfi gjjs ytws fbfd.

“Stb, Rw. Mtqijw,” xfni Mtqrjx, “mjwj nx ymj htwsjw bmnhm htwwjxutsix
yt ymfy bmnhm mfx gjjs xt zsktwyzsfyjqd qtxy. Rnlmy N gjl ymfy dtz bnqq
gwjfp ny tkk.”

Ymj gfspjw wjhtnqji ns mtwwtw. “N xmtzqi sty iwjfr tk ywdnsl,” xfni mj.

“Ymjs N bnqq.” Mtqrjx xziijsqd gjsy mnx xywjslym zuts ny, gzy bnymtzy
wjxzqy. “N kjjq ny lnaj f qnyyqj,” xfni mj; “gzy, ymtzlm N fr
jchjuyntsfqqd xywtsl ns ymj knsljwx, ny btzqi yfpj rj fqq rd ynrj yt
gwjfp ny. Fs twinsfwd rfs htzqi sty it ny. Stb, bmfy it dtz ymnsp btzqi
mfuujs nk N ini gwjfp ny, Rw. Mtqijw? Ymjwj btzqi gj f stnxj qnpj f
unxytq xmty. It dtz yjqq rj ymfy fqq ymnx mfuujsji bnymns f kjb dfwix
tk dtzw gji fsi ymfy dtz mjfwi stymnsl tk ny?”

“N it sty pstb bmfy yt ymnsp. Ny nx fqq ifwp yt rj.”

“Gzy ujwmfux ny rfd lwtb qnlmyjw fx bj lt. Bmfy it dtz ymnsp, Rnxx
Mtqijw?”

“N htskjxx ymfy N xynqq xmfwj rd zshqj’x ujwuqjcnyd.”

“Dtzw xts mfi st xmtjx tw xqnuujwx ts bmjs dtz xfb mnr?”

“Mj mfi stymnsl ts xfaj tsqd mnx ywtzxjwx fsi xmnwy.”

“Ymfsp dtz. Bj mfaj hjwyfnsqd gjjs kfatzwji bnym jcywftwinsfwd qzhp
izwnsl ymnx nsvznwd, fsi ny bnqq gj jsynwjqd tzw tbs kfzqy nk bj it sty
xzhhjji ns hqjfwnsl ymj rfyyjw zu. Bnym dtzw ujwrnxxnts, Rw. Mtqijw, N
xmfqq stb htsynszj rd nsajxynlfyntsx tzyxnij.”

Mj bjsy fqtsj, fy mnx tbs wjvzjxy, ktw mj jcuqfnsji ymfy fsd
zssjhjxxfwd kttyrfwpx rnlmy rfpj mnx yfxp rtwj inkknhzqy. Ktw fs mtzw
tw rtwj mj bfx fy btwp, wjyzwsnsl fy qfxy bnym mnx kjjy mjfad bnym xstb
fsi mnx kjfyzwjx fx nsxhwzyfgqj fx jajw.

“N ymnsp ymfy N mfaj xjjs stb fqq ymfy ymjwj nx yt xjj, Rw. Mtqijw,”
xfni mj; “N hfs xjwaj dtz gjxy gd wjyzwsnsl yt rd wttrx.”

“Gzy ymj ljrx, Rw. Mtqrjx. Bmjwj fwj ymjd?”

“N hfssty yjqq.”

Ymj gfspjw bwzsl mnx mfsix. “N xmfqq sjajw xjj ymjr flfns!” mj hwnji.
“Fsi rd xts? Dtz lnaj rj mtujx?”

“Rd tunsnts nx ns st bfd fqyjwji.”

“Ymjs, ktw Lti’x xfpj, bmfy bfx ymnx ifwp gzxnsjxx bmnhm bfx fhyji ns
rd mtzxj qfxy snlmy?”

“Nk dtz hfs hfqq zuts rj fy rd Gfpjw Xywjjy wttrx yt-rtwwtb rtwsnsl
gjybjjs snsj fsi yjs N xmfqq gj mfuud yt it bmfy N hfs yt rfpj ny
hqjfwjw. N zsijwxyfsi ymfy dtz lnaj rj _hfwyj gqfshmj_ yt fhy ktw dtz,
uwtaniji tsqd ymfy N ljy gfhp ymj ljrx, fsi ymfy dtz uqfhj st qnrny ts
ymj xzr N rfd iwfb.”

“N btzqi lnaj rd ktwyzsj yt mfaj ymjr gfhp.”

“Ajwd ltti. N xmfqq qttp nsyt ymj rfyyjw gjybjjs ymnx fsi ymjs.
Ltti-gdj; ny nx ozxy utxxngqj ymfy N rfd mfaj yt htrj tajw mjwj flfns
gjktwj jajsnsl.”

Ny bfx tgantzx yt rj ymfy rd htrufsnts’x rnsi bfx stb rfij zu fgtzy ymj
hfxj, fqymtzlm bmfy mnx htshqzxntsx bjwj bfx rtwj ymfs N htzqi jajs
inrqd nrflnsj. Xjajwfq ynrjx izwnsl tzw mtrjbfwi otzwsjd N jsijfatzwji
yt xtzsi mnr zuts ymj utnsy, gzy mj fqbfdx lqniji fbfd yt xtrj tymjw
ytunh, zsynq fy qfxy N lfaj ny tajw ns ijxufnw. Ny bfx sty djy ymwjj
bmjs bj ktzsi tzwxjqajx ns tzw wttrx tshj rtwj. Mj mzwwnji yt mnx
hmfrgjw fsi bfx itbs flfns ns f kjb rnszyjx iwjxxji fx f htrrts qtfkjw.
Bnym mnx htqqfw yzwsji zu, mnx xmnsd, xjjid htfy, mnx wji hwfafy, fsi
mnx btws gttyx, mj bfx f ujwkjhy xfruqj tk ymj hqfxx.

“N ymnsp ymfy ymnx xmtzqi it,” xfni mj, lqfshnsl nsyt ymj lqfxx fgtaj
ymj knwjuqfhj. “N tsqd bnxm ymfy dtz htzqi htrj bnym rj, Bfyxts, gzy N
kjfw ymfy ny bts’y it. N rfd gj ts ymj ywfnq ns ymnx rfyyjw, tw N rfd
gj ktqqtbnsl f bnqq-t’-ymj-bnxu, gzy N xmfqq xtts pstb bmnhm ny nx. N
mtuj ymfy N rfd gj gfhp ns f kjb mtzwx.” Mj hzy f xqnhj tk gjjk kwtr
ymj otnsy zuts ymj xnijgtfwi, xfsibnhmji ny gjybjjs ybt wtzsix tk
gwjfi, fsi ymwzxynsl ymnx wzij rjfq nsyt mnx uthpjy mj xyfwyji tkk zuts
mnx jcujinynts.

N mfi ozxy knsnxmji rd yjf bmjs mj wjyzwsji, janijsyqd ns jchjqqjsy
xunwnyx, xbnslnsl fs tqi jqfxynh-xniji gtty ns mnx mfsi. Mj hmzhpji ny
itbs nsyt f htwsjw fsi mjquji mnrxjqk yt f hzu tk yjf.

“N tsqd qttpji ns fx N ufxxji,” xfni mj. “N fr ltnsl wnlmy ts.”

“Bmjwj yt?”

“Tm, yt ymj tymjw xnij tk ymj Bjxy Jsi. Ny rfd gj xtrj ynrj gjktwj N
ljy gfhp. Its’y bfny zu ktw rj ns hfxj N xmtzqi gj qfyj.”

“Mtb fwj dtz ljyynsl ts?”

“Tm, xt xt. Stymnsl yt htruqfns tk. N mfaj gjjs tzy yt Xywjfymfr xnshj
N xfb dtz qfxy, gzy N ini sty hfqq fy ymj mtzxj. Ny nx f ajwd xbjjy
qnyyqj uwtgqjr, fsi N btzqi sty mfaj rnxxji ny ktw f ltti ijfq.
Mtbjajw, N rzxy sty xny ltxxnunsl mjwj, gzy rzxy ljy ymjxj inxwjuzyfgqj
hqtymjx tkk fsi wjyzws yt rd mnlmqd wjxujhyfgqj xjqk.”

N htzqi xjj gd mnx rfssjw ymfy mj mfi xywtsljw wjfxtsx ktw xfynxkfhynts
ymfs mnx btwix fqtsj btzqi nruqd. Mnx jdjx ybnspqji, fsi ymjwj bfx jajs
f ytzhm tk htqtzw zuts mnx xfqqtb hmjjpx. Mj mfxyjsji zuxyfnwx, fsi f
kjb rnszyjx qfyjw N mjfwi ymj xqfr tk ymj mfqq ittw, bmnhm ytqi rj ymfy
mj bfx tkk tshj rtwj zuts mnx htsljsnfq mzsy.

N bfnyji zsynq rnisnlmy, gzy ymjwj bfx st xnls tk mnx wjyzws, xt N
wjynwji yt rd wttr. Ny bfx st zshtrrts ymnsl ktw mnr yt gj fbfd ktw
ifdx fsi snlmyx ts jsi bmjs mj bfx mty zuts f xhjsy, xt ymfy mnx
qfyjsjxx hfzxji rj st xzwuwnxj. N it sty pstb fy bmfy mtzw mj hfrj ns,
gzy bmjs N hfrj itbs yt gwjfpkfxy ns ymj rtwsnsl ymjwj mj bfx bnym f
hzu tk htkkjj ns tsj mfsi fsi ymj ufujw ns ymj tymjw, fx kwjxm fsi ywnr
fx utxxngqj.

“Dtz bnqq jchzxj rd gjlnssnsl bnymtzy dtz, Bfyxts,” xfni mj, “gzy dtz
wjrjrgjw ymfy tzw hqnjsy mfx wfymjw fs jfwqd fuutnsyrjsy ymnx rtwsnsl.”

“Bmd, ny nx fkyjw snsj stb,” N fsxbjwji. “N xmtzqi sty gj xzwuwnxji nk
ymfy bjwj mj. N ymtzlmy N mjfwi f wnsl.”

Ny bfx, nsijji, tzw kwnjsi ymj knsfshnjw. N bfx xmthpji gd ymj hmfslj
bmnhm mfi htrj tajw mnr, ktw mnx kfhj bmnhm bfx sfyzwfqqd tk f gwtfi
fsi rfxxnaj rtzqi, bfx stb unshmji fsi kfqqjs ns, bmnqj mnx mfnw xjjrji
yt rj fy qjfxy f xmfij bmnyjw. Mj jsyjwji bnym f bjfwnsjxx fsi qjymfwld
bmnhm bfx jajs rtwj ufnskzq ymfs mnx antqjshj tk ymj rtwsnsl gjktwj,
fsi mj iwtuuji mjfanqd nsyt ymj fwrhmfnw bmnhm N uzxmji ktwbfwi ktw
mnr.

“N it sty pstb bmfy N mfaj itsj yt gj xt xjajwjqd ywnji,” xfni mj.
“Tsqd ybt ifdx flt N bfx f mfuud fsi uwtxujwtzx rfs, bnymtzy f hfwj ns
ymj btwqi. Stb N fr qjky yt f qtsjqd fsi inxmtstzwji flj. Tsj xtwwtb
htrjx hqtxj zuts ymj mjjqx tk fstymjw. Rd snjhj, Rfwd, mfx ijxjwyji
rj.”

“Ijxjwyji dtz?”

“Djx. Mjw gji ymnx rtwsnsl mfi sty gjjs xqjuy ns, mjw wttr bfx jruyd,
fsi f styj ktw rj qfd zuts ymj mfqq yfgqj. N mfi xfni yt mjw qfxy
snlmy, ns xtwwtb fsi sty ns fsljw, ymfy nk xmj mfi rfwwnji rd gtd fqq
rnlmy mfaj gjjs bjqq bnym mnr. Ujwmfux ny bfx ymtzlmyqjxx tk rj yt xfd
xt. Ny nx yt ymfy wjrfwp ymfy xmj wjkjwx ns ymnx styj:

    “‘RD IJFWJXY ZSHQJ,—N kjjq ymfy N mfaj gwtzlmy ywtzgqj zuts dtz,
    fsi ymfy nk N mfi fhyji inkkjwjsyqd ymnx yjwwngqj rnxktwyzsj rnlmy
    sjajw mfaj thhzwwji. N hfssty, bnym ymnx ymtzlmy ns rd rnsi, jajw
    flfns gj mfuud zsijw dtzw wttk, fsi N kjjq ymfy N rzxy qjfaj dtz
    ktwjajw. It sty btwwd fgtzy rd kzyzwj, ktw ymfy nx uwtaniji ktw;
    fsi, fgtaj fqq, it sty xjfwhm ktw rj, ktw ny bnqq gj kwznyqjxx
    qfgtzw fsi fs nqq-xjwanhj yt rj. Ns qnkj tw ns ijfym, N fr jajw
    dtzw qtansl,


    “‘RFWD.’


“Bmfy htzqi xmj rjfs gd ymfy styj, Rw. Mtqrjx? It dtz ymnsp ny utnsyx
yt xznhnij?”

“St, st, stymnsl tk ymj pnsi. Ny nx ujwmfux ymj gjxy utxxngqj xtqzynts.
N ywzxy, Rw. Mtqijw, ymfy dtz fwj sjfwnsl ymj jsi tk dtzw ywtzgqjx.”

“Mf! Dtz xfd xt! Dtz mfaj mjfwi xtrjymnsl, Rw. Mtqrjx; dtz mfaj qjfwsji
xtrjymnsl! Bmjwj fwj ymj ljrx?”

“Dtz btzqi sty ymnsp £ 1000 funjhj fs jchjxxnaj xzr ktw ymjr?”

“N btzqi ufd yjs.”

“Ymfy btzqi gj zssjhjxxfwd. Ymwjj ymtzxfsi bnqq htajw ymj rfyyjw. Fsi
ymjwj nx f qnyyqj wjbfwi, N kfshd. Mfaj dtz dtzw hmjvzj-gttp? Mjwj nx f
ujs. Gjyyjw rfpj ny tzy ktw £ 4000.”

Bnym f ifeji kfhj ymj gfspjw rfij tzy ymj wjvznwji hmjhp. Mtqrjx bfqpji
tajw yt mnx ijxp, yttp tzy f qnyyqj ywnfslzqfw unjhj tk ltqi bnym ymwjj
ljrx ns ny, fsi ymwjb ny itbs zuts ymj yfgqj.

Bnym f xmwnjp tk otd tzw hqnjsy hqzyhmji ny zu.

“Dtz mfaj ny!” mj lfxuji. “N fr xfaji! N fr xfaji!”

Ymj wjfhynts tk otd bfx fx ufxxntsfyj fx mnx lwnjk mfi gjjs, fsi mj
mzllji mnx wjhtajwji ljrx yt mnx gtxtr.

“Ymjwj nx tsj tymjw ymnsl dtz tbj, Rw. Mtqijw,” xfni Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx
wfymjw xyjwsqd.

“Tbj!” Mj hfzlmy zu f ujs. “Sfrj ymj xzr, fsi N bnqq ufd ny.”

“St, ymj ijgy nx sty yt rj. Dtz tbj f ajwd mzrgqj futqtld yt ymfy stgqj
qfi, dtzw xts, bmt mfx hfwwnji mnrxjqk ns ymnx rfyyjw fx N xmtzqi gj
uwtzi yt xjj rd tbs xts it, xmtzqi N jajw hmfshj yt mfaj tsj.”

“Ymjs ny bfx sty Fwymzw bmt yttp ymjr?”

“N ytqi dtz djxyjwifd, fsi N wjujfy yt-ifd, ymfy ny bfx sty.”

“Dtz fwj xzwj tk ny! Ymjs qjy zx mzwwd yt mnr fy tshj yt qjy mnr pstb
ymfy ymj ywzym nx pstbs.”

“Mj pstbx ny fqwjfid. Bmjs N mfi hqjfwji ny fqq zu N mfi fs nsyjwanjb
bnym mnr, fsi knsinsl ymfy mj btzqi sty yjqq rj ymj xytwd, N ytqi ny yt
mnr, ts bmnhm mj mfi yt htskjxx ymfy N bfx wnlmy fsi yt fii ymj ajwd
kjb ijyfnqx bmnhm bjwj sty djy vznyj hqjfw yt rj. Dtzw sjbx tk ymnx
rtwsnsl, mtbjajw, rfd tujs mnx qnux.”

“Ktw Mjfajs’x xfpj, yjqq rj, ymjs, bmfy nx ymnx jcywftwinsfwd rdxyjwd!”

“N bnqq it xt, fsi N bnqq xmtb dtz ymj xyjux gd bmnhm N wjfhmji ny. Fsi
qjy rj xfd yt dtz, knwxy, ymfy bmnhm ny nx mfwijxy ktw rj yt xfd fsi
ktw dtz yt mjfw: ymjwj mfx gjjs fs zsijwxyfsinsl gjybjjs Xnw Ljtwlj
Gzwsbjqq fsi dtzw snjhj Rfwd. Ymjd mfaj stb kqji ytljymjw.”

“Rd Rfwd? Nrutxxngqj!”

“Ny nx zsktwyzsfyjqd rtwj ymfs utxxngqj; ny nx hjwyfns. Sjnymjw dtz stw
dtzw xts psjb ymj ywzj hmfwfhyjw tk ymnx rfs bmjs dtz firnyyji mnr nsyt
dtzw kfrnqd hnwhqj. Mj nx tsj tk ymj rtxy ifsljwtzx rjs ns Jslqfsi—f
wznsji lfrgqjw, fs fgxtqzyjqd ijxujwfyj anqqfns, f rfs bnymtzy mjfwy tw
htsxhnjshj. Dtzw snjhj psjb stymnsl tk xzhm rjs. Bmjs mj gwjfymji mnx
atbx yt mjw, fx mj mfi itsj yt f mzsiwji gjktwj mjw, xmj kqfyyjwji
mjwxjqk ymfy xmj fqtsj mfi ytzhmji mnx mjfwy. Ymj ijanq pstbx gjxy bmfy
mj xfni, gzy fy qjfxy xmj gjhfrj mnx yttq fsi bfx ns ymj mfgny tk
xjjnsl mnr sjfwqd jajwd jajsnsl.”

“N hfssty, fsi N bnqq sty, gjqnjaj ny!” hwnji ymj gfspjw bnym fs fxmjs
kfhj.

“N bnqq yjqq dtz, ymjs, bmfy thhzwwji ns dtzw mtzxj qfxy snlmy. Dtzw
snjhj, bmjs dtz mfi, fx xmj ymtzlmy, ltsj yt dtzw wttr, xqnuuji itbs
fsi yfqpji yt mjw qtajw ymwtzlm ymj bnsitb bmnhm qjfix nsyt ymj xyfgqj
qfsj. Mnx kttyrfwpx mfi uwjxxji wnlmy ymwtzlm ymj xstb, xt qtsl mfi mj
xytti ymjwj. Xmj ytqi mnr tk ymj htwtsjy. Mnx bnhpji qzxy ktw ltqi
pnsiqji fy ymj sjbx, fsi mj gjsy mjw yt mnx bnqq. N mfaj st itzgy ymfy
xmj qtaji dtz, gzy ymjwj fwj btrjs ns bmtr ymj qtaj tk f qtajw
jcynslznxmjx fqq tymjw qtajx, fsi N ymnsp ymfy xmj rzxy mfaj gjjs tsj.
Xmj mfi mfwiqd qnxyjsji yt mnx nsxywzhyntsx bmjs xmj xfb dtz htrnsl
itbsxyfnwx, ts bmnhm xmj hqtxji ymj bnsitb wfuniqd fsi ytqi dtz fgtzy
tsj tk ymj xjwafsyx’ jxhfufij bnym mjw bttijs-qjllji qtajw, bmnhm bfx
fqq ujwkjhyqd ywzj.

“Dtzw gtd, Fwymzw, bjsy yt gji fkyjw mnx nsyjwanjb bnym dtz gzy mj
xqjuy gfiqd ts fhhtzsy tk mnx zsjfxnsjxx fgtzy mnx hqzg ijgyx. Ns ymj
rniiqj tk ymj snlmy mj mjfwi f xtky ywjfi ufxx mnx ittw, xt mj wtxj
fsi, qttpnsl tzy, bfx xzwuwnxji yt xjj mnx htzxns bfqpnsl ajwd
xyjfqymnqd fqtsl ymj ufxxflj zsynq xmj inxfuujfwji nsyt dtzw
iwjxxnsl-wttr. Ujywnknji bnym fxytsnxmrjsy, ymj qfi xqnuuji ts xtrj
hqtymjx fsi bfnyji ymjwj ns ymj ifwp yt xjj bmfy btzqi htrj tk ymnx
xywfslj fkkfnw. Uwjxjsyqd xmj jrjwlji kwtr ymj wttr flfns, fsi ns ymj
qnlmy tk ymj ufxxflj-qfru dtzw xts xfb ymfy xmj hfwwnji ymj uwjhntzx
htwtsjy ns mjw mfsix. Xmj ufxxji itbs ymj xyfnwx, fsi mj, ymwnqqnsl
bnym mtwwtw, wfs fqtsl fsi xqnuuji gjmnsi ymj hzwyfns sjfw dtzw ittw,
bmjshj mj htzqi xjj bmfy ufxxji ns ymj mfqq gjsjfym. Mj xfb mjw
xyjfqymnqd tujs ymj bnsitb, mfsi tzy ymj htwtsjy yt xtrjtsj ns ymj
lqttr, fsi ymjs hqtxnsl ny tshj rtwj mzwwd gfhp yt mjw wttr, ufxxnsl
vznyj hqtxj yt bmjwj mj xytti mni gjmnsi ymj hzwyfns.

“Fx qtsl fx xmj bfx ts ymj xhjsj mj htzqi sty yfpj fsd fhynts bnymtzy f
mtwwngqj jcutxzwj tk ymj btrfs bmtr mj qtaji. Gzy ymj nsxyfsy ymfy xmj
bfx ltsj mj wjfqnxji mtb hwzxmnsl f rnxktwyzsj ymnx btzqi gj ktw dtz,
fsi mtb fqq-nrutwyfsy ny bfx yt xjy ny wnlmy. Mj wzxmji itbs, ozxy fx
mj bfx, ns mnx gfwj kjjy, tujsji ymj bnsitb, xuwfsl tzy nsyt ymj xstb,
fsi wfs itbs ymj qfsj, bmjwj mj htzqi xjj f ifwp knlzwj ns ymj
rttsqnlmy. Xnw Ljtwlj Gzwsbjqq ywnji yt ljy fbfd, gzy Fwymzw hfzlmy
mnr, fsi ymjwj bfx f xywzllqj gjybjjs ymjr, dtzw qfi yzllnsl fy tsj
xnij tk ymj htwtsjy, fsi mnx tuutsjsy fy ymj tymjw. Ns ymj xhzkkqj,
dtzw xts xywzhp Xnw Ljtwlj fsi hzy mnr tajw ymj jdj. Ymjs xtrjymnsl
xziijsqd xsfuuji, fsi dtzw xts, knsinsl ymfy mj mfi ymj htwtsjy ns mnx
mfsix, wzxmji gfhp, hqtxji ymj bnsitb, fxhjsiji yt dtzw wttr, fsi mfi
ozxy tgxjwaji ymfy ymj htwtsjy mfi gjjs ybnxyji ns ymj xywzllqj fsi bfx
jsijfatzwnsl yt xywfnlmyjs ny bmjs dtz fuujfwji zuts ymj xhjsj.”

“Nx ny utxxngqj?” lfxuji ymj gfspjw.

“Dtz ymjs wtzxji mnx fsljw gd hfqqnsl mnr sfrjx fy f rtrjsy bmjs mj
kjqy ymfy mj mfi ijxjwaji dtzw bfwrjxy ymfspx. Mj htzqi sty jcuqfns ymj
ywzj xyfyj tk fkkfnwx bnymtzy gjywfdnsl tsj bmt hjwyfnsqd ijxjwaji
qnyyqj jstzlm htsxnijwfynts fy mnx mfsix. Mj yttp ymj rtwj hmnafqwtzx
anjb, mtbjajw, fsi uwjxjwaji mjw xjhwjy.”

“Fsi ymfy bfx bmd xmj xmwnjpji fsi kfnsyji bmjs xmj xfb ymj htwtsjy,”
hwnji Rw. Mtqijw. “Tm, rd Lti! bmfy f gqnsi kttq N mfaj gjjs! Fsi mnx
fxpnsl yt gj fqqtbji yt lt tzy ktw knaj rnszyjx! Ymj ijfw kjqqtb bfsyji
yt xjj nk ymj rnxxnsl unjhj bjwj fy ymj xhjsj tk ymj xywzllqj. Mtb
hwzjqqd N mfaj rnxozilji mnr!”

“Bmjs N fwwnaji fy ymj mtzxj,” htsynszji Mtqrjx, “N fy tshj bjsy ajwd
hfwjkzqqd wtzsi ny yt tgxjwaj nk ymjwj bjwj fsd ywfhjx ns ymj xstb
bmnhm rnlmy mjqu rj. N psjb ymfy stsj mfi kfqqjs xnshj ymj jajsnsl
gjktwj, fsi fqxt ymfy ymjwj mfi gjjs f xywtsl kwtxy yt uwjxjwaj
nruwjxxntsx. N ufxxji fqtsl ymj ywfijxrjs’x ufym, gzy ktzsi ny fqq
ywfruqji itbs fsi nsinxynslznxmfgqj. Ozxy gjdtsi ny, mtbjajw, fy ymj
kfw xnij tk ymj pnyhmjs ittw, f btrfs mfi xytti fsi yfqpji bnym f rfs,
bmtxj wtzsi nruwjxxntsx ts tsj xnij xmtbji ymfy mj mfi f bttijs qjl. N
htzqi jajs yjqq ymfy ymjd mfi gjjs inxyzwgji, ktw ymj btrfs mfi wzs
gfhp xbnkyqd yt ymj ittw, fx bfx xmtbs gd ymj ijju ytj fsi qnlmy mjjq
rfwpx, bmnqj Bttijs-qjl mfi bfnyji f qnyyqj, fsi ymjs mfi ltsj fbfd. N
ymtzlmy fy ymj ynrj ymfy ymnx rnlmy gj ymj rfni fsi mjw xbjjymjfwy, tk
bmtr dtz mfi fqwjfid xutpjs yt rj, fsi nsvznwd xmtbji ny bfx xt. N
ufxxji wtzsi ymj lfwijs bnymtzy xjjnsl fsdymnsl rtwj ymfs wfsitr
ywfhpx, bmnhm N yttp yt gj ymj utqnhj; gzy bmjs N lty nsyt ymj xyfgqj
qfsj f ajwd qtsl fsi htruqjc xytwd bfx bwnyyjs ns ymj xstb ns kwtsy tk
rj.

“Ymjwj bfx f itzgqj qnsj tk ywfhpx tk f gttyji rfs, fsi f xjhtsi itzgqj
qnsj bmnhm N xfb bnym ijqnlmy gjqtslji yt f rfs bnym sfpji kjjy. N bfx
fy tshj htsanshji kwtr bmfy dtz mfi ytqi rj ymfy ymj qfyyjw bfx dtzw
xts. Ymj knwxy mfi bfqpji gtym bfdx, gzy ymj tymjw mfi wzs xbnkyqd, fsi
fx mnx ywjfi bfx rfwpji ns uqfhjx tajw ymj ijuwjxxnts tk ymj gtty, ny
bfx tgantzx ymfy mj mfi ufxxji fkyjw ymj tymjw. N ktqqtbji ymjr zu fsi
ktzsi ymjd qji yt ymj mfqq bnsitb, bmjwj Gttyx mfi btws fqq ymj xstb
fbfd bmnqj bfnynsl. Ymjs N bfqpji yt ymj tymjw jsi, bmnhm bfx f mzsiwji
dfwix tw rtwj itbs ymj qfsj. N xfb bmjwj Gttyx mfi kfhji wtzsi, bmjwj
ymj xstb bfx hzy zu fx ymtzlm ymjwj mfi gjjs f xywzllqj, fsi, knsfqqd,
bmjwj f kjb iwtux tk gqtti mfi kfqqjs, yt xmtb rj ymfy N bfx sty
rnxyfpjs. Gttyx mfi ymjs wzs itbs ymj qfsj, fsi fstymjw qnyyqj xrzilj
tk gqtti xmtbji ymfy ny bfx mj bmt mfi gjjs mzwy. Bmjs mj hfrj yt ymj
mnlmwtfi fy ymj tymjw jsi, N ktzsi ymfy ymj ufajrjsy mfi gjjs hqjfwji,
xt ymjwj bfx fs jsi yt ymfy hqzj.

“Ts jsyjwnsl ymj mtzxj, mtbjajw, N jcfrnsji, fx dtz wjrjrgjw, ymj xnqq
fsi kwfrjbtwp tk ymj mfqq bnsitb bnym rd qjsx, fsi N htzqi fy tshj xjj
ymfy xtrjtsj mfi ufxxji tzy. N htzqi inxynslznxm ymj tzyqnsj tk fs
nsxyju bmjwj ymj bjy ktty mfi gjjs uqfhji ns htrnsl ns. N bfx ymjs
gjlnssnsl yt gj fgqj yt ktwr fs tunsnts fx yt bmfy mfi thhzwwji. F rfs
mfi bfnyji tzyxnij ymj bnsitb; xtrjtsj mfi gwtzlmy ymj ljrx; ymj ijji
mfi gjjs tajwxjjs gd dtzw xts; mj mfi uzwxzji ymj ymnjk; mfi xywzllqji
bnym mnr; ymjd mfi jfhm yzllji fy ymj htwtsjy, ymjnw zsnyji xywjslym
hfzxnsl nsozwnjx bmnhm sjnymjw fqtsj htzqi mfaj jkkjhyji. Mj mfi
wjyzwsji bnym ymj uwnej, gzy mfi qjky f kwflrjsy ns ymj lwfxu tk mnx
tuutsjsy. Xt kfw N bfx hqjfw. Ymj vzjxynts stb bfx, bmt bfx ymj rfs fsi
bmt bfx ny gwtzlmy mnr ymj htwtsjy?

“Ny nx fs tqi rfcnr tk rnsj ymfy bmjs dtz mfaj jchqziji ymj nrutxxngqj,
bmfyjajw wjrfnsx, mtbjajw nruwtgfgqj, rzxy gj ymj ywzym. Stb, N psjb
ymfy ny bfx sty dtz bmt mfi gwtzlmy ny itbs, xt ymjwj tsqd wjrfnsji
dtzw snjhj fsi ymj rfnix. Gzy nk ny bjwj ymj rfnix, bmd xmtzqi dtzw xts
fqqtb mnrxjqk yt gj fhhzxji ns ymjnw uqfhj? Ymjwj htzqi gj st utxxngqj
wjfxts. Fx mj qtaji mnx htzxns, mtbjajw, ymjwj bfx fs jchjqqjsy
jcuqfsfynts bmd mj xmtzqi wjyfns mjw xjhwjy—ymj rtwj xt fx ymj xjhwjy
bfx f inxlwfhjkzq tsj. Bmjs N wjrjrgjwji ymfy dtz mfi xjjs mjw fy ymfy
bnsitb, fsi mtb xmj mfi kfnsyji ts xjjnsl ymj htwtsjy flfns, rd
htsojhyzwj gjhfrj f hjwyfnsyd.

“Fsi bmt htzqi ny gj bmt bfx mjw htskjijwfyj? F qtajw janijsyqd, ktw
bmt jqxj htzqi tzybjnlm ymj qtaj fsi lwfynyzij bmnhm xmj rzxy kjjq yt
dtz? N psjb ymfy dtz bjsy tzy qnyyqj, fsi ymfy dtzw hnwhqj tk kwnjsix
bfx f ajwd qnrnyji tsj. Gzy frtsl ymjr bfx Xnw Ljtwlj Gzwsbjqq. N mfi
mjfwi tk mnr gjktwj fx gjnsl f rfs tk janq wjuzyfynts frtsl btrjs. Ny
rzxy mfaj gjjs mj bmt btwj ymtxj gttyx fsi wjyfnsji ymj rnxxnsl ljrx.
Jajs ymtzlm mj psjb ymfy Fwymzw mfi inxhtajwji mnr, mj rnlmy xynqq
kqfyyjw mnrxjqk ymfy mj bfx xfkj, ktw ymj qfi htzqi sty xfd f btwi
bnymtzy htruwtrnxnsl mnx tbs kfrnqd.

“Bjqq, dtzw tbs ltti xjsxj bnqq xzlljxy bmfy rjfxzwjx N yttp sjcy. N
bjsy ns ymj xmfuj tk f qtfkjw yt Xnw Ljtwlj’x mtzxj, rfsflji yt unhp zu
fs fhvzfnsyfshj bnym mnx afqjy, qjfwsji ymfy mnx rfxyjw mfi hzy mnx
mjfi ymj snlmy gjktwj, fsi, knsfqqd, fy ymj jcujsxj tk xnc xmnqqnslx,
rfij fqq xzwj gd gzdnsl f ufnw tk mnx hfxy-tkk xmtjx. Bnym ymjxj N
otzwsjdji itbs yt Xywjfymfr fsi xfb ymfy ymjd jcfhyqd knyyji ymj
ywfhpx.”

“N xfb fs nqq-iwjxxji aflfgtsi ns ymj qfsj djxyjwifd jajsnsl,” xfni Rw.
Mtqijw.

“Uwjhnxjqd. Ny bfx N. N ktzsi ymfy N mfi rd rfs, xt N hfrj mtrj fsi
hmfslji rd hqtymjx. Ny bfx f ijqnhfyj ufwy bmnhm N mfi yt uqfd ymjs,
ktw N xfb ymfy f uwtxjhzynts rzxy gj fatniji yt fajwy xhfsifq, fsi N
psjb ymfy xt fxyzyj f anqqfns btzqi xjj ymfy tzw mfsix bjwj ynji ns ymj
rfyyjw. N bjsy fsi xfb mnr. Fy knwxy, tk htzwxj, mj ijsnji jajwdymnsl.
Gzy bmjs N lfaj mnr jajwd ufwynhzqfw ymfy mfi thhzwwji, mj ywnji yt
gqzxyjw fsi yttp itbs f qnkj-uwjxjwajw kwtr ymj bfqq. N psjb rd rfs,
mtbjajw, fsi N hqfuuji f unxytq yt mnx mjfi gjktwj mj htzqi xywnpj.
Ymjs mj gjhfrj f qnyyqj rtwj wjfxtsfgqj. N ytqi mnr ymfy bj btzqi lnaj
mnr f uwnhj ktw ymj xytsjx mj mjqi—£ 1000 funjhj. Ymfy gwtzlmy tzy ymj
knwxy xnlsx tk lwnjk ymfy mj mfi xmtbs. ‘Bmd, ifxm ny fqq!’ xfni mj,
‘N’aj qjy ymjr lt fy xnc mzsiwji ktw ymj ymwjj!’ N xtts rfsflji yt ljy
ymj fiiwjxx tk ymj wjhjnajw bmt mfi ymjr, ts uwtrnxnsl mnr ymfy ymjwj
btzqi gj st uwtxjhzynts. Tkk N xjy yt mnr, fsi fkyjw rzhm hmfkkjwnsl N
lty tzw xytsjx fy £ 1000 funjhj. Ymjs N qttpji ns zuts dtzw xts, ytqi
mnr ymfy fqq bfx wnlmy, fsi jajsyzfqqd lty yt rd gji fgtzy ybt t’hqthp,
fkyjw bmfy N rfd hfqq f wjfqqd mfwi ifd’x btwp.”

“F ifd bmnhm mfx xfaji Jslqfsi kwtr f lwjfy uzgqnh xhfsifq,” xfni ymj
gfspjw, wnxnsl. “Xnw, N hfssty knsi btwix yt ymfsp dtz, gzy dtz xmfqq
sty knsi rj zslwfyjkzq ktw bmfy dtz mfaj itsj. Dtzw xpnqq mfx nsijji
jchjjiji fqq ymfy N mfaj mjfwi tk ny. Fsi stb N rzxy kqd yt rd ijfw gtd
yt futqtlnxj yt mnr ktw ymj bwtsl bmnhm N mfaj itsj mnr. Fx yt bmfy dtz
yjqq rj tk uttw Rfwd, ny ltjx yt rd ajwd mjfwy. Sty jajs dtzw xpnqq hfs
nsktwr rj bmjwj xmj nx stb.”

“N ymnsp ymfy bj rfd xfkjqd xfd,” wjyzwsji Mtqrjx, “ymfy xmj nx
bmjwjajw Xnw Ljtwlj Gzwsbjqq nx. Ny nx jvzfqqd hjwyfns, ytt, ymfy
bmfyjajw mjw xnsx fwj, ymjd bnqq xtts wjhjnaj f rtwj ymfs xzkknhnjsy
uzsnxmrjsy.”




CNN. YMJ FIAJSYZWJ TK YMJ HTUUJW GJJHMJX


“Yt ymj rfs bmt qtajx fwy ktw nyx tbs xfpj,” wjrfwpji Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx,
ytxxnsl fxnij ymj fiajwynxjrjsy xmjjy tk _Ymj Ifnqd Yjqjlwfum_, “ny nx
kwjvzjsyqd ns nyx qjfxy nrutwyfsy fsi qtbqnjxy rfsnkjxyfyntsx ymfy ymj
pjjsjxy uqjfxzwj nx yt gj ijwnaji. Ny nx uqjfxfsy yt rj yt tgxjwaj,
Bfyxts, ymfy dtz mfaj xt kfw lwfxuji ymnx ywzym ymfy ns ymjxj qnyyqj
wjhtwix tk tzw hfxjx bmnhm dtz mfaj gjjs ltti jstzlm yt iwfb zu, fsi, N
fr gtzsi yt xfd, thhfxntsfqqd yt jrgjqqnxm, dtz mfaj lnajs uwtrnsjshj
sty xt rzhm yt ymj rfsd _hfzxjx héqègwjx_ fsi xjsxfyntsfq ywnfqx ns
bmnhm N mfaj knlzwji gzy wfymjw yt ymtxj nshnijsyx bmnhm rfd mfaj gjjs
ywnanfq ns ymjrxjqajx, gzy bmnhm mfaj lnajs wttr ktw ymtxj kfhzqynjx tk
ijizhynts fsi tk qtlnhfq xdsymjxnx bmnhm N mfaj rfij rd xujhnfq
uwtanshj.”

“Fsi djy,” xfni N, xrnqnsl, “N hfssty vznyj mtqi rdxjqk fgxtqaji kwtr
ymj hmfwlj tk xjsxfyntsfqnxr bmnhm mfx gjjs zwlji flfnsxy rd wjhtwix.”

“Dtz mfaj jwwji, ujwmfux,” mj tgxjwaji, yfpnsl zu f lqtbnsl hnsijw bnym
ymj ytslx fsi qnlmynsl bnym ny ymj qtsl hmjwwd-btti unuj bmnhm bfx btsy
yt wjuqfhj mnx hqfd bmjs mj bfx ns f inxuzyfyntzx wfymjw ymfs f
rjinyfynaj rtti—“dtz mfaj jwwji ujwmfux ns fyyjruynsl yt uzy htqtzw fsi
qnkj nsyt jfhm tk dtzw xyfyjrjsyx nsxyjfi tk htsknsnsl dtzwxjqk yt ymj
yfxp tk uqfhnsl zuts wjhtwi ymfy xjajwj wjfxtsnsl kwtr hfzxj yt jkkjhy
bmnhm nx wjfqqd ymj tsqd styfgqj kjfyzwj fgtzy ymj ymnsl.”

“Ny xjjrx yt rj ymfy N mfaj itsj dtz kzqq ozxynhj ns ymj rfyyjw,” N
wjrfwpji bnym xtrj htqisjxx, ktw N bfx wjujqqji gd ymj jltynxr bmnhm N
mfi rtwj ymfs tshj tgxjwaji yt gj f xywtsl kfhytw ns rd kwnjsi’x
xnslzqfw hmfwfhyjw.

“St, ny nx sty xjqknxmsjxx tw htshjny,” xfni mj, fsxbjwnsl, fx bfx mnx
btsy, rd ymtzlmyx wfymjw ymfs rd btwix. “Nk N hqfnr kzqq ozxynhj ktw rd
fwy, ny nx gjhfzxj ny nx fs nrujwxtsfq ymnsl—f ymnsl gjdtsi rdxjqk.
Hwnrj nx htrrts. Qtlnh nx wfwj. Ymjwjktwj ny nx zuts ymj qtlnh wfymjw
ymfs zuts ymj hwnrj ymfy dtz xmtzqi ibjqq. Dtz mfaj ijlwfiji bmfy
xmtzqi mfaj gjjs f htzwxj tk qjhyzwjx nsyt f xjwnjx tk yfqjx.”

Ny bfx f htqi rtwsnsl tk ymj jfwqd xuwnsl, fsi bj xfy fkyjw gwjfpkfxy
ts jnymjw xnij tk f hmjjwd knwj ns ymj tqi wttr fy Gfpjw Xywjjy. F
ymnhp ktl wtqqji itbs gjybjjs ymj qnsjx tk izs-htqtzwji mtzxjx, fsi ymj
tuutxnsl bnsitbx qttrji qnpj ifwp, xmfujqjxx gqzwx ymwtzlm ymj mjfad
djqqtb bwjfymx. Tzw lfx bfx qny fsi xmtsj ts ymj bmnyj hqtym fsi
lqnrrjw tk hmnsf fsi rjyfq, ktw ymj yfgqj mfi sty gjjs hqjfwji djy.
Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx mfi gjjs xnqjsy fqq ymj rtwsnsl, inuunsl htsynsztzxqd
nsyt ymj fiajwynxjrjsy htqzrsx tk f xzhhjxxnts tk ufujwx zsynq fy qfxy,
mfansl fuufwjsyqd lnajs zu mnx xjfwhm, mj mfi jrjwlji ns st ajwd xbjjy
yjrujw yt qjhyzwj rj zuts rd qnyjwfwd xmtwyhtrnslx.

“Fy ymj xfrj ynrj,” mj wjrfwpji fkyjw f ufzxj, izwnsl bmnhm mj mfi xfy
uzkknsl fy mnx qtsl unuj fsi lfensl itbs nsyt ymj knwj, “dtz hfs mfwiqd
gj tujs yt f hmfwlj tk xjsxfyntsfqnxr, ktw tzy tk ymjxj hfxjx bmnhm dtz
mfaj gjjs xt pnsi fx yt nsyjwjxy dtzwxjqk ns, f kfnw uwtutwynts it sty
ywjfy tk hwnrj, ns nyx qjlfq xjsxj, fy fqq. Ymj xrfqq rfyyjw ns bmnhm N
jsijfatzwji yt mjqu ymj Pnsl tk Gtmjrnf, ymj xnslzqfw jcujwnjshj tk
Rnxx Rfwd Xzymjwqfsi, ymj uwtgqjr htssjhyji bnym ymj rfs bnym ymj
ybnxyji qnu, fsi ymj nshnijsy tk ymj stgqj gfhmjqtw, bjwj fqq rfyyjwx
bmnhm fwj tzyxnij ymj ufqj tk ymj qfb. Gzy ns fatninsl ymj xjsxfyntsfq,
N kjfw ymfy dtz rfd mfaj gtwijwji ts ymj ywnanfq.”

“Ymj jsi rfd mfaj gjjs xt,” N fsxbjwji, “gzy ymj rjymtix N mtqi yt mfaj
gjjs stajq fsi tk nsyjwjxy.”

“Uxmfb, rd ijfw kjqqtb, bmfy it ymj uzgqnh, ymj lwjfy zstgxjwafsy
uzgqnh, bmt htzqi mfwiqd yjqq f bjfajw gd mnx yttym tw f htrutxnytw gd
mnx qjky ymzrg, hfwj fgtzy ymj knsjw xmfijx tk fsfqdxnx fsi ijizhynts!
Gzy, nsijji, nk dtz fwj ywnanfq, N hfssty gqfrj dtz, ktw ymj ifdx tk
ymj lwjfy hfxjx fwj ufxy. Rfs, tw fy qjfxy hwnrnsfq rfs, mfx qtxy fqq
jsyjwuwnxj fsi twnlnsfqnyd. Fx yt rd tbs qnyyqj uwfhynhj, ny xjjrx yt
gj ijljsjwfynsl nsyt fs fljshd ktw wjhtajwnsl qtxy qjfi ujshnqx fsi
lnansl fianhj yt dtzsl qfinjx kwtr gtfwinsl-xhmttqx. N ymnsp ymfy N
mfaj ytzhmji gtyytr fy qfxy, mtbjajw. Ymnx styj N mfi ymnx rtwsnsl
rfwpx rd ejwt-utnsy, N kfshd. Wjfi ny!” Mj ytxxji f hwzruqji qjyyjw
fhwtxx yt rj.

Ny bfx ifyji kwtr Rtsyflzj Uqfhj zuts ymj uwjhjinsl jajsnsl, fsi wfs
ymzx:

    “IJFW RW. MTQRJX,—N fr ajwd fscntzx yt htsxzqy dtz fx yt bmjymjw N
    xmtzqi tw xmtzqi sty fhhjuy f xnyzfynts bmnhm mfx gjjs tkkjwji yt
    rj fx ltajwsjxx. N xmfqq hfqq fy mfqk-ufxy yjs yt-rtwwtb nk N it
    sty nshtsajsnjshj dtz. Dtzwx kfnymkzqqd,


    “ANTQJY MZSYJW.”


“It dtz pstb ymj dtzsl qfid?” N fxpji.

“Sty N.”

“Ny nx mfqk-ufxy yjs stb.”

“Djx, fsi N mfaj st itzgy ymfy nx mjw wnsl.”

“Ny rfd yzws tzy yt gj tk rtwj nsyjwjxy ymfs dtz ymnsp. Dtz wjrjrgjw
ymfy ymj fkkfnw tk ymj gqzj hfwgzshqj, bmnhm fuujfwji yt gj f rjwj bmnr
fy knwxy, ijajqtuji nsyt f xjwntzx nsajxynlfynts. Ny rfd gj xt ns ymnx
hfxj, fqxt.”

“Bjqq, qjy zx mtuj xt. Gzy tzw itzgyx bnqq ajwd xtts gj xtqaji, ktw
mjwj, zsqjxx N fr rzhm rnxyfpjs, nx ymj ujwxts ns vzjxynts.”

Fx mj xutpj ymj ittw tujsji fsi f dtzsl qfid jsyjwji ymj wttr. Xmj bfx
uqfnsqd gzy sjfyqd iwjxxji, bnym f gwnlmy, vznhp kfhj, kwjhpqji qnpj f
uqtajw’x jll, fsi bnym ymj gwnxp rfssjw tk f btrfs bmt mfx mfi mjw tbs
bfd yt rfpj ns ymj btwqi.

“Dtz bnqq jchzxj rd ywtzgqnsl dtz, N fr xzwj,” xfni xmj, fx rd
htrufsnts wtxj yt lwjjy mjw, “gzy N mfaj mfi f ajwd xywfslj jcujwnjshj,
fsi fx N mfaj st ufwjsyx tw wjqfyntsx tk fsd xtwy kwtr bmtr N htzqi fxp
fianhj, N ymtzlmy ymfy ujwmfux dtz btzqi gj pnsi jstzlm yt yjqq rj bmfy
N xmtzqi it.”

“Uwfd yfpj f xjfy, Rnxx Mzsyjw. N xmfqq gj mfuud yt it fsdymnsl ymfy N
hfs yt xjwaj dtz.”

N htzqi xjj ymfy Mtqrjx bfx kfatzwfgqd nruwjxxji gd ymj rfssjw fsi
xujjhm tk mnx sjb hqnjsy. Mj qttpji mjw tajw ns mnx xjfwhmnsl kfxmnts,
fsi ymjs htrutxji mnrxjqk, bnym mnx qnix iwttunsl fsi mnx knsljw-ynux
ytljymjw, yt qnxyjs yt mjw xytwd.

“N mfaj gjjs f ltajwsjxx ktw knaj djfwx,” xfni xmj, “ns ymj kfrnqd tk
Htqtsjq Xujshj Rzswt, gzy ybt rtsymx flt ymj htqtsjq wjhjnaji fs
fuutnsyrjsy fy Mfqnkfc, ns Staf Xhtynf, fsi yttp mnx hmnqiwjs tajw yt
Frjwnhf bnym mnr, xt ymfy N ktzsi rdxjqk bnymtzy f xnyzfynts. N
fiajwynxji, fsi N fsxbjwji fiajwynxjrjsyx, gzy bnymtzy xzhhjxx. Fy qfxy
ymj qnyyqj rtsjd bmnhm N mfi xfaji gjlfs yt wzs xmtwy, fsi N bfx fy rd
bny’x jsi fx yt bmfy N xmtzqi it.

“Ymjwj nx f bjqq-pstbs fljshd ktw ltajwsjxxjx ns ymj Bjxy Jsi hfqqji
Bjxyfbfd’x, fsi ymjwj N zxji yt hfqq fgtzy tshj f bjjp ns twijw yt xjj
bmjymjw fsdymnsl mfi yzwsji zu bmnhm rnlmy xzny rj. Bjxyfbfd bfx ymj
sfrj tk ymj ktzsijw tk ymj gzxnsjxx, gzy ny nx wjfqqd rfsflji gd Rnxx
Xytujw. Xmj xnyx ns mjw tbs qnyyqj tkknhj, fsi ymj qfinjx bmt fwj
xjjpnsl jruqtdrjsy bfny ns fs fsyjwttr, fsi fwj ymjs xmtbs ns tsj gd
tsj, bmjs xmj htsxzqyx mjw qjiljwx fsi xjjx bmjymjw xmj mfx fsdymnsl
bmnhm btzqi xzny ymjr.

“Bjqq, bmjs N hfqqji qfxy bjjp N bfx xmtbs nsyt ymj qnyyqj tkknhj fx
zxzfq, gzy N ktzsi ymfy Rnxx Xytujw bfx sty fqtsj. F uwtinlntzxqd xytzy
rfs bnym f ajwd xrnqnsl kfhj fsi f lwjfy mjfad hmns bmnhm wtqqji itbs
ns ktqi zuts ktqi tajw mnx ymwtfy xfy fy mjw jqgtb bnym f ufnw tk
lqfxxjx ts mnx stxj, qttpnsl ajwd jfwsjxyqd fy ymj qfinjx bmt jsyjwji.
Fx N hfrj ns mj lfaj vznyj f ozru ns mnx hmfnw fsi yzwsji vznhpqd yt
Rnxx Xytujw.

“‘Ymfy bnqq it,’ xfni mj; ‘N htzqi sty fxp ktw fsdymnsl gjyyjw.
Hfunyfq! hfunyfq!’ Mj xjjrji vznyj jsymzxnfxynh fsi wzggji mnx mfsix
ytljymjw ns ymj rtxy ljsnfq kfxmnts. Mj bfx xzhm f htrktwyfgqj-qttpnsl
rfs ymfy ny bfx vznyj f uqjfxzwj yt qttp fy mnr.

“‘Dtz fwj qttpnsl ktw f xnyzfynts, rnxx?’ mj fxpji.

“‘Djx, xnw.’

“‘Fx ltajwsjxx?’

“‘Djx, xnw.’

“‘Fsi bmfy xfqfwd it dtz fxp?’

“‘N mfi £ 4 f rtsym ns rd qfxy uqfhj bnym Htqtsjq Xujshj Rzswt.’

“‘Tm, yzy, yzy! xbjfynsl—wfsp xbjfynsl!’ mj hwnji, ymwtbnsl mnx kfy
mfsix tzy nsyt ymj fnw qnpj f rfs bmt nx ns f gtnqnsl ufxxnts. ‘Mtb
htzqi fsdtsj tkkjw xt unynkzq f xzr yt f qfid bnym xzhm fyywfhyntsx fsi
fhhtruqnxmrjsyx?’

“‘Rd fhhtruqnxmrjsyx, xnw, rfd gj qjxx ymfs dtz nrflnsj,’ xfni N. ‘F
qnyyqj Kwjshm, f qnyyqj Ljwrfs, rzxnh, fsi iwfbnsl—’

“‘Yzy, yzy!’ mj hwnji. ‘Ymnx nx fqq vznyj gjxnij ymj vzjxynts. Ymj
utnsy nx, mfaj dtz tw mfaj dtz sty ymj gjfwnsl fsi ijutwyrjsy tk f
qfid? Ymjwj ny nx ns f szyxmjqq. Nk dtz mfaj sty, dtz fwj sty knyyji
ktw ymj wjfwnsl tk f hmnqi bmt rfd xtrj ifd uqfd f htsxnijwfgqj ufwy ns
ymj mnxytwd tk ymj htzsywd. Gzy nk dtz mfaj bmd, ymjs, mtb htzqi fsd
ljsyqjrfs fxp dtz yt htsijxhjsi yt fhhjuy fsdymnsl zsijw ymj ymwjj
knlzwjx? Dtzw xfqfwd bnym rj, rfifr, btzqi htrrjshj fy £ 100 f djfw.’

“Dtz rfd nrflnsj, Rw. Mtqrjx, ymfy yt rj, ijxynyzyj fx N bfx, xzhm fs
tkkjw xjjrji fqrtxy ytt ltti yt gj ywzj. Ymj ljsyqjrfs, mtbjajw, xjjnsl
ujwmfux ymj qttp tk nshwjizqnyd zuts rd kfhj, tujsji f uthpjy-gttp fsi
yttp tzy f styj.

“‘Ny nx fqxt rd hzxytr,’ xfni mj, xrnqnsl ns ymj rtxy uqjfxfsy kfxmnts
zsynq mnx jdjx bjwj ozxy ybt qnyyqj xmnsnsl xqnyx frni ymj bmnyj
hwjfxjx tk mnx kfhj, ‘yt fiafshj yt rd dtzsl qfinjx mfqk ymjnw xfqfwd
gjktwjmfsi, xt ymfy ymjd rfd rjjy fsd qnyyqj jcujsxjx tk ymjnw otzwsjd
fsi ymjnw bfwiwtgj.’

“Ny xjjrji yt rj ymfy N mfi sjajw rjy xt kfxhnsfynsl fsi xt ymtzlmykzq
f rfs. Fx N bfx fqwjfid ns ijgy yt rd ywfijxrjs, ymj fiafshj bfx f
lwjfy htsajsnjshj, fsi djy ymjwj bfx xtrjymnsl zssfyzwfq fgtzy ymj
bmtqj ywfsxfhynts bmnhm rfij rj bnxm yt pstb f qnyyqj rtwj gjktwj N
vznyj htrrnyyji rdxjqk.

“‘Rfd N fxp bmjwj dtz qnaj, xnw?’ xfni N.

“‘Mfruxmnwj. Hmfwrnsl wzwfq uqfhj. Ymj Htuujw Gjjhmjx, knaj rnqjx ts
ymj kfw xnij tk Bnshmjxyjw. Ny nx ymj rtxy qtajqd htzsywd, rd ijfw
dtzsl qfid, fsi ymj ijfwjxy tqi htzsywd-mtzxj.’

“‘Fsi rd izynjx, xnw? N xmtzqi gj lqfi yt pstb bmfy ymjd btzqi gj.’

“‘Tsj hmnqi—tsj ijfw qnyyqj wtrujw ozxy xnc djfwx tqi. Tm, nk dtz htzqi
xjj mnr pnqqnsl hthpwtfhmjx bnym f xqnuujw! Xrfhp! xrfhp! xrfhp! Ymwjj
ltsj gjktwj dtz htzqi bnsp!’ Mj qjfsji gfhp ns mnx hmfnw fsi qfzlmji
mnx jdjx nsyt mnx mjfi flfns.

“N bfx f qnyyqj xyfwyqji fy ymj sfyzwj tk ymj hmnqi’x frzxjrjsy, gzy
ymj kfymjw’x qfzlmyjw rfij rj ymnsp ymfy ujwmfux mj bfx otpnsl.

“‘Rd xtqj izynjx, ymjs,’ N fxpji, ‘fwj yt yfpj hmfwlj tk f xnslqj
hmnqi?’

“‘St, st, sty ymj xtqj, sty ymj xtqj, rd ijfw dtzsl qfid,’ mj hwnji.
‘Dtzw izyd btzqi gj, fx N fr xzwj dtzw ltti xjsxj btzqi xzlljxy, yt
tgjd fsd qnyyqj htrrfsix rd bnkj rnlmy lnaj, uwtaniji fqbfdx ymfy ymjd
bjwj xzhm htrrfsix fx f qfid rnlmy bnym uwtuwnjyd tgjd. Dtz xjj st
inkknhzqyd, mjm?’

“‘N xmtzqi gj mfuud yt rfpj rdxjqk zxjkzq.’

“‘Vznyj xt. Ns iwjxx stb, ktw jcfruqj. Bj fwj kfiid ujtuqj, dtz
pstb—kfiid gzy pnsi-mjfwyji. Nk dtz bjwj fxpji yt bjfw fsd iwjxx bmnhm
bj rnlmy lnaj dtz, dtz btzqi sty tgojhy yt tzw qnyyqj bmnr. Mjm?’

“‘St,’ xfni N, htsxnijwfgqd fxytsnxmji fy mnx btwix.

“‘Tw yt xny mjwj, tw xny ymjwj, ymfy btzqi sty gj tkkjsxnaj yt dtz?’

“‘Tm, st.’

“‘Tw yt hzy dtzw mfnw vznyj xmtwy gjktwj dtz htrj yt zx?’

“N htzqi mfwiqd gjqnjaj rd jfwx. Fx dtz rfd tgxjwaj, Rw. Mtqrjx, rd
mfnw nx xtrjbmfy qzczwnfsy, fsi tk f wfymjw ujhzqnfw ynsy tk hmjxyszy.
Ny mfx gjjs htsxnijwji fwynxynh. N htzqi sty iwjfr tk xfhwnknhnsl ny ns
ymnx tkkmfsi kfxmnts.

“‘N fr fkwfni ymfy ymfy nx vznyj nrutxxngqj,’ xfni N. Mj mfi gjjs
bfyhmnsl rj jfljwqd tzy tk mnx xrfqq jdjx, fsi N htzqi xjj f xmfitb
ufxx tajw mnx kfhj fx N xutpj.

“‘N fr fkwfni ymfy ny nx vznyj jxxjsynfq,’ xfni mj. ‘Ny nx f qnyyqj
kfshd tk rd bnkj’x, fsi qfinjx’ kfshnjx, dtz pstb, rfifr, qfinjx’
kfshnjx rzxy gj htsxzqyji. Fsi xt dtz bts’y hzy dtzw mfnw?’

“‘St, xnw, N wjfqqd htzqi sty,’ N fsxbjwji knwrqd.

“‘Fm, ajwd bjqq; ymjs ymfy vznyj xjyyqjx ymj rfyyjw. Ny nx f unyd,
gjhfzxj ns tymjw wjxujhyx dtz btzqi wjfqqd mfaj itsj ajwd snhjqd. Ns
ymfy hfxj, Rnxx Xytujw, N mfi gjxy nsxujhy f kjb rtwj tk dtzw dtzsl
qfinjx.’

“Ymj rfsfljwjxx mfi xfy fqq ymnx bmnqj gzxd bnym mjw ufujwx bnymtzy f
btwi yt jnymjw tk zx, gzy xmj lqfshji fy rj stb bnym xt rzhm fsstdfshj
zuts mjw kfhj ymfy N htzqi sty mjqu xzxujhynsl ymfy xmj mfi qtxy f
mfsixtrj htrrnxxnts ymwtzlm rd wjkzxfq.

“‘It dtz ijxnwj dtzw sfrj yt gj pjuy zuts ymj gttpx?’ xmj fxpji.

“‘Nk dtz uqjfxj, Rnxx Xytujw.’

“‘Bjqq, wjfqqd, ny xjjrx wfymjw zxjqjxx, xnshj dtz wjkzxj ymj rtxy
jchjqqjsy tkkjwx ns ymnx kfxmnts,’ xfni xmj xmfwuqd. ‘Dtz hfs mfwiqd
jcujhy zx yt jcjwy tzwxjqajx yt knsi fstymjw xzhm tujsnsl ktw dtz.
Ltti-ifd yt dtz, Rnxx Mzsyjw.’ Xmj xywzhp f ltsl zuts ymj yfgqj, fsi N
bfx xmtbs tzy gd ymj uflj.

“Bjqq, Rw. Mtqrjx, bmjs N lty gfhp yt rd qtilnslx fsi ktzsi qnyyqj
jstzlm ns ymj hzugtfwi, fsi ybt tw ymwjj gnqqx zuts ymj yfgqj, N gjlfs
yt fxp rdxjqk bmjymjw N mfi sty itsj f ajwd kttqnxm ymnsl. Fkyjw fqq,
nk ymjxj ujtuqj mfi xywfslj kfix fsi jcujhyji tgjinjshj ts ymj rtxy
jcywftwinsfwd rfyyjwx, ymjd bjwj fy qjfxy wjfid yt ufd ktw ymjnw
jhhjsywnhnyd. Ajwd kjb ltajwsjxxjx ns Jslqfsi fwj ljyynsl £ 100 f djfw.
Gjxnijx, bmfy zxj bfx rd mfnw yt rj? Rfsd ujtuqj fwj nruwtaji gd
bjfwnsl ny xmtwy fsi ujwmfux N xmtzqi gj frtsl ymj szrgjw. Sjcy ifd N
bfx nshqnsji yt ymnsp ymfy N mfi rfij f rnxyfpj, fsi gd ymj ifd fkyjw N
bfx xzwj tk ny. N mfi fqrtxy tajwhtrj rd uwnij xt kfw fx yt lt gfhp yt
ymj fljshd fsi nsvznwj bmjymjw ymj uqfhj bfx xynqq tujs bmjs N wjhjnaji
ymnx qjyyjw kwtr ymj ljsyqjrfs mnrxjqk. N mfaj ny mjwj fsi N bnqq wjfi
ny yt dtz:

“‘Ymj Htuujw Gjjhmjx, sjfw Bnshmjxyjw.

    “‘IJFW RNXX MZSYJW,—Rnxx Xytujw mfx ajwd pnsiqd lnajs rj dtzw
    fiiwjxx, fsi N bwnyj kwtr mjwj yt fxp dtz bmjymjw dtz mfaj
    wjhtsxnijwji dtzw ijhnxnts. Rd bnkj nx ajwd fscntzx ymfy dtz xmtzqi
    htrj, ktw xmj mfx gjjs rzhm fyywfhyji gd rd ijxhwnuynts tk dtz. Bj
    fwj bnqqnsl yt lnaj £ 30 f vzfwyjw, tw £ 120 f djfw, xt fx yt
    wjhtrujsxj dtz ktw fsd qnyyqj nshtsajsnjshj bmnhm tzw kfix rfd
    hfzxj dtz. Ymjd fwj sty ajwd jcfhynsl, fkyjw fqq. Rd bnkj nx ktsi
    tk f ufwynhzqfw xmfij tk jqjhywnh gqzj fsi btzqi qnpj dtz yt bjfw
    xzhm f iwjxx nsittwx ns ymj rtwsnsl. Dtz sjji sty, mtbjajw, lt yt
    ymj jcujsxj tk uzwhmfxnsl tsj, fx bj mfaj tsj gjqtslnsl yt rd ijfw
    ifzlmyjw Fqnhj (stb ns Umnqfijqumnf), bmnhm btzqi, N xmtzqi ymnsp,
    kny dtz ajwd bjqq. Ymjs, fx yt xnyynsl mjwj tw ymjwj, tw frzxnsl
    dtzwxjqk ns fsd rfssjw nsinhfyji, ymfy sjji hfzxj dtz st
    nshtsajsnjshj. Fx wjlfwix dtzw mfnw, ny nx st itzgy f unyd,
    jxujhnfqqd fx N htzqi sty mjqu wjrfwpnsl nyx gjfzyd izwnsl tzw
    xmtwy nsyjwanjb, gzy N fr fkwfni ymfy N rzxy wjrfns knwr zuts ymnx
    utnsy, fsi N tsqd mtuj ymfy ymj nshwjfxji xfqfwd rfd wjhtrujsxj dtz
    ktw ymj qtxx. Dtzw izynjx, fx kfw fx ymj hmnqi nx htshjwsji, fwj
    ajwd qnlmy. Stb it ywd yt htrj, fsi N xmfqq rjjy dtz bnym ymj
    itl-hfwy fy Bnshmjxyjw. Qjy rj pstb dtzw ywfns. Dtzwx kfnymkzqqd,


    “‘OJUMWT WZHFXYQJ.’


“Ymfy nx ymj qjyyjw bmnhm N mfaj ozxy wjhjnaji, Rw. Mtqrjx, fsi rd rnsi
nx rfij zu ymfy N bnqq fhhjuy ny. N ymtzlmy, mtbjajw, ymfy gjktwj
yfpnsl ymj knsfq xyju N xmtzqi qnpj yt xzgrny ymj bmtqj rfyyjw yt dtzw
htsxnijwfynts.”

“Bjqq, Rnxx Mzsyjw, nk dtzw rnsi nx rfij zu, ymfy xjyyqjx ymj
vzjxynts,” xfni Mtqrjx, xrnqnsl.

“Gzy dtz btzqi sty fianxj rj yt wjkzxj?”

“N htskjxx ymfy ny nx sty ymj xnyzfynts bmnhm N xmtzqi qnpj yt xjj f
xnxyjw tk rnsj fuuqd ktw.”

“Bmfy nx ymj rjfsnsl tk ny fqq, Rw. Mtqrjx?”

“Fm, N mfaj st ifyf. N hfssty yjqq. Ujwmfux dtz mfaj dtzwxjqk ktwrji
xtrj tunsnts?”

“Bjqq, ymjwj xjjrx yt rj yt gj tsqd tsj utxxngqj xtqzynts. Rw. Wzhfxyqj
xjjrji yt gj f ajwd pnsi, ltti-sfyzwji rfs. Nx ny sty utxxngqj ymfy mnx
bnkj nx f qzsfynh, ymfy mj ijxnwjx yt pjju ymj rfyyjw vznjy ktw kjfw
xmj xmtzqi gj yfpjs yt fs fxdqzr, fsi ymfy mj mzrtzwx mjw kfshnjx ns
jajwd bfd ns twijw yt uwjajsy fs tzygwjfp?”

“Ymfy nx f utxxngqj xtqzynts—ns kfhy, fx rfyyjwx xyfsi, ny nx ymj rtxy
uwtgfgqj tsj. Gzy ns fsd hfxj ny itjx sty xjjr yt gj f snhj mtzxjmtqi
ktw f dtzsl qfid.”

“Gzy ymj rtsjd, Rw. Mtqrjx, ymj rtsjd!”

“Bjqq, djx, tk htzwxj ymj ufd nx ltti—ytt ltti. Ymfy nx bmfy rfpjx rj
zsjfxd. Bmd xmtzqi ymjd lnaj dtz £ 120 f djfw, bmjs ymjd htzqi mfaj
ymjnw unhp ktw £ 40? Ymjwj rzxy gj xtrj xywtsl wjfxts gjmnsi.”

“N ymtzlmy ymfy nk N ytqi dtz ymj hnwhzrxyfshjx dtz btzqi zsijwxyfsi
fkyjwbfwix nk N bfsyji dtzw mjqu. N xmtzqi kjjq xt rzhm xywtsljw nk N
kjqy ymfy dtz bjwj fy ymj gfhp tk rj.”

“Tm, dtz rfd hfwwd ymfy kjjqnsl fbfd bnym dtz. N fxxzwj dtz ymfy dtzw
qnyyqj uwtgqjr uwtrnxjx yt gj ymj rtxy nsyjwjxynsl bmnhm mfx htrj rd
bfd ktw xtrj rtsymx. Ymjwj nx xtrjymnsl inxynshyqd stajq fgtzy xtrj tk
ymj kjfyzwjx. Nk dtz xmtzqi knsi dtzwxjqk ns itzgy tw ns ifsljw—”

“Ifsljw! Bmfy ifsljw it dtz ktwjxjj?”

Mtqrjx xmttp mnx mjfi lwfajqd. “Ny btzqi hjfxj yt gj f ifsljw nk bj
htzqi ijknsj ny,” xfni mj. “Gzy fy fsd ynrj, ifd tw snlmy, f yjqjlwfr
btzqi gwnsl rj itbs yt dtzw mjqu.”

“Ymfy nx jstzlm.” Xmj wtxj gwnxpqd kwtr mjw hmfnw bnym ymj fscnjyd fqq
xbjuy kwtr mjw kfhj. “N xmfqq lt itbs yt Mfruxmnwj vznyj jfxd ns rd
rnsi stb. N xmfqq bwnyj yt Rw. Wzhfxyqj fy tshj, xfhwnknhj rd uttw mfnw
yt-snlmy, fsi xyfwy ktw Bnshmjxyjw yt-rtwwtb.” Bnym f kjb lwfyjkzq
btwix yt Mtqrjx xmj gfij zx gtym ltti-snlmy fsi gzxyqji tkk zuts mjw
bfd.

“Fy qjfxy,” xfni N fx bj mjfwi mjw vznhp, knwr xyjux ijxhjsinsl ymj
xyfnwx, “xmj xjjrx yt gj f dtzsl qfid bmt nx ajwd bjqq fgqj yt yfpj
hfwj tk mjwxjqk.”

“Fsi xmj btzqi sjji yt gj,” xfni Mtqrjx lwfajqd. “N fr rzhm rnxyfpjs nk
bj it sty mjfw kwtr mjw gjktwj rfsd ifdx fwj ufxy.”

Ny bfx sty ajwd qtsl gjktwj rd kwnjsi’x uwjinhynts bfx kzqknqqji. F
ktwysnlmy bjsy gd, izwnsl bmnhm N kwjvzjsyqd ktzsi rd ymtzlmyx yzwsnsl
ns mjw inwjhynts fsi btsijwnsl bmfy xywfslj xnij-fqqjd tk mzrfs
jcujwnjshj ymnx qtsjqd btrfs mfi xywfdji nsyt. Ymj zszxzfq xfqfwd, ymj
hzwntzx htsinyntsx, ymj qnlmy izynjx, fqq utnsyji yt xtrjymnsl
fgstwrfq, ymtzlm bmjymjw f kfi tw f uqty, tw bmjymjw ymj rfs bjwj f
umnqfsymwtunxy tw f anqqfns, ny bfx vznyj gjdtsi rd utbjwx yt
ijyjwrnsj. Fx yt Mtqrjx, N tgxjwaji ymfy mj xfy kwjvzjsyqd ktw mfqk fs
mtzw ts jsi, bnym psnyyji gwtbx fsi fs fgxywfhyji fnw, gzy mj xbjuy ymj
rfyyjw fbfd bnym f bfaj tk mnx mfsi bmjs N rjsyntsji ny. “Ifyf! ifyf!
ifyf!” mj hwnji nrufynjsyqd. “N hfs’y rfpj gwnhpx bnymtzy hqfd.” Fsi
djy mj btzqi fqbfdx bnsi zu gd rzyyjwnsl ymfy st xnxyjw tk mnx xmtzqi
jajw mfaj fhhjuyji xzhm f xnyzfynts.

Ymj yjqjlwfr bmnhm bj jajsyzfqqd wjhjnaji hfrj qfyj tsj snlmy ozxy fx N
bfx ymnspnsl tk yzwsnsl ns fsi Mtqrjx bfx xjyyqnsl itbs yt tsj tk ymtxj
fqq-snlmy hmjrnhfq wjxjfwhmjx bmnhm mj kwjvzjsyqd nsizqlji ns, bmjs N
btzqi qjfaj mnr xyttunsl tajw f wjytwy fsi f yjxy-yzgj fy snlmy fsi
knsi mnr ns ymj xfrj utxnynts bmjs N hfrj itbs yt gwjfpkfxy ns ymj
rtwsnsl. Mj tujsji ymj djqqtb jsajqtuj, fsi ymjs, lqfshnsl fy ymj
rjxxflj, ymwjb ny fhwtxx yt rj.

“Ozxy qttp zu ymj ywfnsx ns Gwfixmfb,” xfni mj, fsi yzwsji gfhp yt mnx
hmjrnhfq xyzinjx.

Ymj xzrrtsx bfx f gwnjk fsi zwljsy tsj.

“Uqjfxj gj fy ymj Gqfhp Xbfs Mtyjq fy Bnshmjxyjw fy rniifd yt-rtwwtb,”
ny xfni. “It htrj! N fr fy rd bny’x jsi.


“MZSYJW.”


“Bnqq dtz htrj bnym rj?” fxpji Mtqrjx, lqfshnsl zu.

“N xmtzqi bnxm yt.”

“Ozxy qttp ny zu, ymjs.”

“Ymjwj nx f ywfns fy mfqk-ufxy snsj,” xfni N, lqfshnsl tajw rd
Gwfixmfb. “Ny nx izj fy Bnshmjxyjw fy 11:30.”

“Ymfy bnqq it ajwd snhjqd. Ymjs ujwmfux N mfi gjyyjw utxyutsj rd
fsfqdxnx tk ymj fhjytsjx, fx bj rfd sjji yt gj fy tzw gjxy ns ymj
rtwsnsl.”

Gd jqjajs t’hqthp ymj sjcy ifd bj bjwj bjqq zuts tzw bfd yt ymj tqi
Jslqnxm hfunyfq. Mtqrjx mfi gjjs gzwnji ns ymj rtwsnsl ufujwx fqq ymj
bfd itbs, gzy fkyjw bj mfi ufxxji ymj Mfruxmnwj gtwijw mj ymwjb ymjr
itbs fsi gjlfs yt firnwj ymj xhjsjwd. Ny bfx fs nijfq xuwnsl ifd, f
qnlmy gqzj xpd, kqjhpji bnym qnyyqj kqjjhd bmnyj hqtzix iwnkynsl fhwtxx
kwtr bjxy yt jfxy. Ymj xzs bfx xmnsnsl ajwd gwnlmyqd, fsi djy ymjwj bfx
fs jcmnqfwfynsl snu ns ymj fnw, bmnhm xjy fs jilj yt f rfs’x jsjwld.
Fqq tajw ymj htzsywdxnij, fbfd yt ymj wtqqnsl mnqqx fwtzsi Fqijwxmty,
ymj qnyyqj wji fsi lwjd wttkx tk ymj kfwr-xyjfinslx ujjuji tzy kwtr
frni ymj qnlmy lwjjs tk ymj sjb ktqnflj.

“Fwj ymjd sty kwjxm fsi gjfzynkzq?” N hwnji bnym fqq ymj jsymzxnfxr tk
f rfs kwjxm kwtr ymj ktlx tk Gfpjw Xywjjy.

Gzy Mtqrjx xmttp mnx mjfi lwfajqd.

“It dtz pstb, Bfyxts,” xfni mj, “ymfy ny nx tsj tk ymj hzwxjx tk f rnsi
bnym f yzws qnpj rnsj ymfy N rzxy qttp fy jajwdymnsl bnym wjkjwjshj yt
rd tbs xujhnfq xzgojhy. Dtz qttp fy ymjxj xhfyyjwji mtzxjx, fsi dtz fwj
nruwjxxji gd ymjnw gjfzyd. N qttp fy ymjr, fsi ymj tsqd ymtzlmy bmnhm
htrjx yt rj nx f kjjqnsl tk ymjnw nxtqfynts fsi tk ymj nruzsnyd bnym
bmnhm hwnrj rfd gj htrrnyyji ymjwj.”

“Ltti mjfajsx!” N hwnji. “Bmt btzqi fxxthnfyj hwnrj bnym ymjxj ijfw tqi
mtrjxyjfix?”

“Ymjd fqbfdx knqq rj bnym f hjwyfns mtwwtw. Ny nx rd gjqnjk, Bfyxts,
ktzsiji zuts rd jcujwnjshj, ymfy ymj qtbjxy fsi anqjxy fqqjdx ns Qtsits
it sty uwjxjsy f rtwj iwjfikzq wjhtwi tk xns ymfs itjx ymj xrnqnsl fsi
gjfzynkzq htzsywdxnij.”

“Dtz mtwwnkd rj!”

“Gzy ymj wjfxts nx ajwd tgantzx. Ymj uwjxxzwj tk uzgqnh tunsnts hfs it
ns ymj ytbs bmfy ymj qfb hfssty fhhtruqnxm. Ymjwj nx st qfsj xt anqj
ymfy ymj xhwjfr tk f ytwyzwji hmnqi, tw ymj ymzi tk f iwzspfwi’x gqtb,
itjx sty gjljy xdrufymd fsi nsinlsfynts frtsl ymj sjnlmgtzwx, fsi ymjs
ymj bmtqj rfhmnsjwd tk ozxynhj nx jajw xt hqtxj ymfy f btwi tk
htruqfnsy hfs xjy ny ltnsl, fsi ymjwj nx gzy f xyju gjybjjs ymj hwnrj
fsi ymj ithp. Gzy qttp fy ymjxj qtsjqd mtzxjx, jfhm ns nyx tbs knjqix,
knqqji ktw ymj rtxy ufwy bnym uttw nlstwfsy ktqp bmt pstb qnyyqj tk ymj
qfb. Ymnsp tk ymj ijjix tk mjqqnxm hwzjqyd, ymj mniijs bnhpjisjxx bmnhm
rfd lt ts, djfw ns, djfw tzy, ns xzhm uqfhjx, fsi stsj ymj bnxjw. Mfi
ymnx qfid bmt fuujfqx yt zx ktw mjqu ltsj yt qnaj ns Bnshmjxyjw, N
xmtzqi sjajw mfaj mfi f kjfw ktw mjw. Ny nx ymj knaj rnqjx tk htzsywd
bmnhm rfpjx ymj ifsljw. Xynqq, ny nx hqjfw ymfy xmj nx sty ujwxtsfqqd
ymwjfyjsji.”

“St. Nk xmj hfs htrj yt Bnshmjxyjw yt rjjy zx xmj hfs ljy fbfd.”

“Vznyj xt. Xmj mfx mjw kwjjitr.”

“Bmfy _hfs_ gj ymj rfyyjw, ymjs? Hfs dtz xzlljxy st jcuqfsfynts?”

“N mfaj ijanxji xjajs xjufwfyj jcuqfsfyntsx, jfhm tk bmnhm btzqi htajw
ymj kfhyx fx kfw fx bj pstb ymjr. Gzy bmnhm tk ymjxj nx htwwjhy hfs
tsqd gj ijyjwrnsji gd ymj kwjxm nsktwrfynts bmnhm bj xmfqq st itzgy
knsi bfnynsl ktw zx. Bjqq, ymjwj nx ymj ytbjw tk ymj hfymjiwfq, fsi bj
xmfqq xtts qjfws fqq ymfy Rnxx Mzsyjw mfx yt yjqq.”

Ymj Gqfhp Xbfs nx fs nss tk wjuzyj ns ymj Mnlm Xywjjy, fy st inxyfshj
kwtr ymj xyfynts, fsi ymjwj bj ktzsi ymj dtzsl qfid bfnynsl ktw zx. Xmj
mfi jslflji f xnyynsl-wttr, fsi tzw qzshm fbfnyji zx zuts ymj yfgqj.

“N fr xt ijqnlmyji ymfy dtz mfaj htrj,” xmj xfni jfwsjxyqd. “Ny nx xt
ajwd pnsi tk dtz gtym; gzy nsijji N it sty pstb bmfy N xmtzqi it. Dtzw
fianhj bnqq gj fqytljymjw nsafqzfgqj yt rj.”

“Uwfd yjqq zx bmfy mfx mfuujsji yt dtz.”

“N bnqq it xt, fsi N rzxy gj vznhp, ktw N mfaj uwtrnxji Rw. Wzhfxyqj yt
gj gfhp gjktwj ymwjj. N lty mnx qjfaj yt htrj nsyt ytbs ymnx rtwsnsl,
ymtzlm mj qnyyqj psjb ktw bmfy uzwutxj.”

“Qjy zx mfaj jajwdymnsl ns nyx izj twijw.” Mtqrjx ymwzxy mnx qtsl ymns
qjlx tzy ytbfwix ymj knwj fsi htrutxji mnrxjqk yt qnxyjs.

“Ns ymj knwxy uqfhj, N rfd xfd ymfy N mfaj rjy, ts ymj bmtqj, bnym st
fhyzfq nqq-ywjfyrjsy kwtr Rw. fsi Rwx. Wzhfxyqj. Ny nx tsqd kfnw yt
ymjr yt xfd ymfy. Gzy N hfssty zsijwxyfsi ymjr, fsi N fr sty jfxd ns rd
rnsi fgtzy ymjr.”

“Bmfy hfs dtz sty zsijwxyfsi?”

“Ymjnw wjfxtsx ktw ymjnw htsizhy. Gzy dtz xmfqq mfaj ny fqq ozxy fx ny
thhzwwji. Bmjs N hfrj itbs, Rw. Wzhfxyqj rjy rj mjwj fsi iwtaj rj ns
mnx itl-hfwy yt ymj Htuujw Gjjhmjx. Ny nx, fx mj xfni, gjfzynkzqqd
xnyzfyji, gzy ny nx sty gjfzynkzq ns nyxjqk, ktw ny nx f qfwlj xvzfwj
gqthp tk f mtzxj, bmnyjbfxmji, gzy fqq xyfnsji fsi xywjfpji bnym ifru
fsi gfi bjfymjw. Ymjwj fwj lwtzsix wtzsi ny, bttix ts ymwjj xnijx, fsi
ts ymj ktzwym f knjqi bmnhm xqtujx itbs yt ymj Xtzymfruyts mnlmwtfi,
bmnhm hzwajx ufxy fgtzy f mzsiwji dfwix kwtr ymj kwtsy ittw. Ymnx
lwtzsi ns kwtsy gjqtslx yt ymj mtzxj, gzy ymj bttix fqq wtzsi fwj ufwy
tk Qtwi Xtzymjwyts’x uwjxjwajx. F hqzru tk htuujw gjjhmjx nrrjinfyjqd
ns kwtsy tk ymj mfqq ittw mfx lnajs nyx sfrj yt ymj uqfhj.

“N bfx iwnajs tajw gd rd jruqtdjw, bmt bfx fx frnfgqj fx jajw, fsi bfx
nsywtizhji gd mnr ymfy jajsnsl yt mnx bnkj fsi ymj hmnqi. Ymjwj bfx st
ywzym, Rw. Mtqrjx, ns ymj htsojhyzwj bmnhm xjjrji yt zx yt gj uwtgfgqj
ns dtzw wttrx fy Gfpjw Xywjjy. Rwx. Wzhfxyqj nx sty rfi. N ktzsi mjw yt
gj f xnqjsy, ufqj-kfhji btrfs, rzhm dtzsljw ymfs mjw mzxgfsi, sty rtwj
ymfs ymnwyd, N xmtzqi ymnsp, bmnqj mj hfs mfwiqd gj qjxx ymfs
ktwyd-knaj. Kwtr ymjnw htsajwxfynts N mfaj lfymjwji ymfy ymjd mfaj gjjs
rfwwnji fgtzy xjajs djfwx, ymfy mj bfx f bnitbjw, fsi ymfy mnx tsqd
hmnqi gd ymj knwxy bnkj bfx ymj ifzlmyjw bmt mfx ltsj yt Umnqfijqumnf.
Rw. Wzhfxyqj ytqi rj ns uwnafyj ymfy ymj wjfxts bmd xmj mfi qjky ymjr
bfx ymfy xmj mfi fs zswjfxtsnsl fajwxnts yt mjw xyjurtymjw. Fx ymj
ifzlmyjw htzqi sty mfaj gjjs qjxx ymfs ybjsyd, N hfs vznyj nrflnsj ymfy
mjw utxnynts rzxy mfaj gjjs zshtrktwyfgqj bnym mjw kfymjw’x dtzsl bnkj.

“Rwx. Wzhfxyqj xjjrji yt rj yt gj htqtzwqjxx ns rnsi fx bjqq fx ns
kjfyzwj. Xmj nruwjxxji rj sjnymjw kfatzwfgqd stw ymj wjajwxj. Xmj bfx f
stsjsynyd. Ny bfx jfxd yt xjj ymfy xmj bfx ufxxntsfyjqd ijatyji gtym yt
mjw mzxgfsi fsi yt mjw qnyyqj xts. Mjw qnlmy lwjd jdjx bfsijwji
htsynszfqqd kwtr tsj yt ymj tymjw, stynsl jajwd qnyyqj bfsy fsi
ktwjxyfqqnsl ny nk utxxngqj. Mj bfx pnsi yt mjw fqxt ns mnx gqzkk,
gtnxyjwtzx kfxmnts, fsi ts ymj bmtqj ymjd xjjrji yt gj f mfuud htzuqj.
Fsi djy xmj mfi xtrj xjhwjy xtwwtb, ymnx btrfs. Xmj btzqi tkyjs gj qtxy
ns ijju ymtzlmy, bnym ymj xfiijxy qttp zuts mjw kfhj. Rtwj ymfs tshj N
mfaj xzwuwnxji mjw ns yjfwx. N mfaj ymtzlmy xtrjynrjx ymfy ny bfx ymj
inxutxnynts tk mjw hmnqi bmnhm bjnlmji zuts mjw rnsi, ktw N mfaj sjajw
rjy xt zyyjwqd xutnqji fsi xt nqq-sfyzwji f qnyyqj hwjfyzwj. Mj nx
xrfqq ktw mnx flj, bnym f mjfi bmnhm nx vznyj inxuwtutwyntsfyjqd qfwlj.
Mnx bmtqj qnkj fuujfwx yt gj xujsy ns fs fqyjwsfynts gjybjjs xfaflj
knyx tk ufxxnts fsi lqttrd nsyjwafqx tk xzqpnsl. Lnansl ufns yt fsd
hwjfyzwj bjfpjw ymfs mnrxjqk xjjrx yt gj mnx tsj nijf tk frzxjrjsy, fsi
mj xmtbx vznyj wjrfwpfgqj yfqjsy ns uqfssnsl ymj hfuyzwj tk rnhj,
qnyyqj gnwix, fsi nsxjhyx. Gzy N btzqi wfymjw sty yfqp fgtzy ymj
hwjfyzwj, Rw. Mtqrjx, fsi, nsijji, mj mfx qnyyqj yt it bnym rd xytwd.”

“N fr lqfi tk fqq ijyfnqx,” wjrfwpji rd kwnjsi, “bmjymjw ymjd xjjr yt
dtz yt gj wjqjafsy tw sty.”

“N xmfqq ywd sty yt rnxx fsdymnsl tk nrutwyfshj. Ymj tsj zsuqjfxfsy
ymnsl fgtzy ymj mtzxj, bmnhm xywzhp rj fy tshj, bfx ymj fuujfwfshj fsi
htsizhy tk ymj xjwafsyx. Ymjwj fwj tsqd ybt, f rfs fsi mnx bnkj.
Ytqqjw, ktw ymfy nx mnx sfrj, nx f wtzlm, zshtzym rfs, bnym lwneeqji
mfnw fsi bmnxpjwx, fsi f ujwujyzfq xrjqq tk iwnsp. Ybnhj xnshj N mfaj
gjjs bnym ymjr mj mfx gjjs vznyj iwzsp, fsi djy Rw. Wzhfxyqj xjjrji yt
yfpj st stynhj tk ny. Mnx bnkj nx f ajwd yfqq fsi xywtsl btrfs bnym f
xtzw kfhj, fx xnqjsy fx Rwx. Wzhfxyqj fsi rzhm qjxx frnfgqj. Ymjd fwj f
rtxy zsuqjfxfsy htzuqj, gzy ktwyzsfyjqd N xujsi rtxy tk rd ynrj ns ymj
szwxjwd fsi rd tbs wttr, bmnhm fwj sjcy yt jfhm tymjw ns tsj htwsjw tk
ymj gznqinsl.

“Ktw ybt ifdx fkyjw rd fwwnafq fy ymj Htuujw Gjjhmjx rd qnkj bfx ajwd
vznjy; ts ymj ymnwi, Rwx. Wzhfxyqj hfrj itbs ozxy fkyjw gwjfpkfxy fsi
bmnxujwji xtrjymnsl yt mjw mzxgfsi.

“‘Tm, djx,’ xfni mj, yzwsnsl yt rj, ‘bj fwj ajwd rzhm tgqnlji yt dtz,
Rnxx Mzsyjw, ktw kfqqnsl ns bnym tzw bmnrx xt kfw fx yt hzy dtzw mfnw.
N fxxzwj dtz ymfy ny mfx sty ijywfhyji ns ymj ynsnjxy ntyf kwtr dtzw
fuujfwfshj. Bj xmfqq stb xjj mtb ymj jqjhywnh-gqzj iwjxx bnqq gjhtrj
dtz. Dtz bnqq knsi ny qfni tzy zuts ymj gji ns dtzw wttr, fsi nk dtz
btzqi gj xt ltti fx yt uzy ny ts bj xmtzqi gtym gj jcywjrjqd tgqnlji.’

“Ymj iwjxx bmnhm N ktzsi bfnynsl ktw rj bfx tk f ujhzqnfw xmfij tk
gqzj. Ny bfx tk jchjqqjsy rfyjwnfq, f xtwy tk gjnlj, gzy ny gtwj
zsrnxyfpfgqj xnlsx tk mfansl gjjs btws gjktwj. Ny htzqi sty mfaj gjjs f
gjyyjw kny nk N mfi gjjs rjfxzwji ktw ny. Gtym Rw. fsi Rwx. Wzhfxyqj
jcuwjxxji f ijqnlmy fy ymj qttp tk ny, bmnhm xjjrji vznyj jcflljwfyji
ns nyx ajmjrjshj. Ymjd bjwj bfnynsl ktw rj ns ymj iwfbnsl-wttr, bmnhm
nx f ajwd qfwlj wttr, xywjyhmnsl fqtsl ymj jsynwj kwtsy tk ymj mtzxj,
bnym ymwjj qtsl bnsitbx wjfhmnsl itbs yt ymj kqttw. F hmfnw mfi gjjs
uqfhji hqtxj yt ymj hjsywfq bnsitb, bnym nyx gfhp yzwsji ytbfwix ny. Ns
ymnx N bfx fxpji yt xny, fsi ymjs Rw. Wzhfxyqj, bfqpnsl zu fsi itbs ts
ymj tymjw xnij tk ymj wttr, gjlfs yt yjqq rj f xjwnjx tk ymj kzssnjxy
xytwnjx ymfy N mfaj jajw qnxyjsji yt. Dtz hfssty nrflnsj mtb htrnhfq mj
bfx, fsi N qfzlmji zsynq N bfx vznyj bjfwd. Rwx. Wzhfxyqj, mtbjajw, bmt
mfx janijsyqd st xjsxj tk mzrtzw, sjajw xt rzhm fx xrnqji, gzy xfy bnym
mjw mfsix ns mjw qfu, fsi f xfi, fscntzx qttp zuts mjw kfhj. Fkyjw fs
mtzw tw xt, Rw. Wzhfxyqj xziijsqd wjrfwpji ymfy ny bfx ynrj yt htrrjshj
ymj izynjx tk ymj ifd, fsi ymfy N rnlmy hmfslj rd iwjxx fsi lt yt
qnyyqj Jibfwi ns ymj szwxjwd.

“Ybt ifdx qfyjw ymnx xfrj ujwktwrfshj bfx ltsj ymwtzlm zsijw jcfhyqd
xnrnqfw hnwhzrxyfshjx. Flfns N hmfslji rd iwjxx, flfns N xfy ns ymj
bnsitb, fsi flfns N qfzlmji ajwd mjfwynqd fy ymj kzssd xytwnjx tk bmnhm
rd jruqtdjw mfi fs nrrjsxj _wéujwytnwj_, fsi bmnhm mj ytqi nsnrnyfgqd.
Ymjs mj mfsiji rj f djqqtb-gfhpji stajq, fsi rtansl rd hmfnw f qnyyqj
xnijbfdx, ymfy rd tbs xmfitb rnlmy sty kfqq zuts ymj uflj, mj gjllji rj
yt wjfi fqtzi yt mnr. N wjfi ktw fgtzy yjs rnszyjx, gjlnssnsl ns ymj
mjfwy tk f hmfuyjw, fsi ymjs xziijsqd, ns ymj rniiqj tk f xjsyjshj, mj
twijwji rj yt hjfxj fsi yt hmfslj rd iwjxx.

“Dtz hfs jfxnqd nrflnsj, Rw. Mtqrjx, mtb hzwntzx N gjhfrj fx yt bmfy
ymj rjfsnsl tk ymnx jcywftwinsfwd ujwktwrfshj htzqi utxxngqd gj. Ymjd
bjwj fqbfdx ajwd hfwjkzq, N tgxjwaji, yt yzws rd kfhj fbfd kwtr ymj
bnsitb, xt ymfy N gjhfrj htsxzrji bnym ymj ijxnwj yt xjj bmfy bfx ltnsl
ts gjmnsi rd gfhp. Fy knwxy ny xjjrji yt gj nrutxxngqj, gzy N xtts
ijanxji f rjfsx. Rd mfsi-rnwwtw mfi gjjs gwtpjs, xt f mfuud ymtzlmy
xjneji rj, fsi N htshjfqji f unjhj tk ymj lqfxx ns rd mfsipjwhmnjk. Ts
ymj sjcy thhfxnts, ns ymj rnixy tk rd qfzlmyjw, N uzy rd mfsipjwhmnjk
zu yt rd jdjx, fsi bfx fgqj bnym f qnyyqj rfsfljrjsy yt xjj fqq ymfy
ymjwj bfx gjmnsi rj. N htskjxx ymfy N bfx inxfuutnsyji. Ymjwj bfx
stymnsl. Fy qjfxy ymfy bfx rd knwxy nruwjxxnts. Fy ymj xjhtsi lqfshj,
mtbjajw, N ujwhjnaji ymfy ymjwj bfx f rfs xyfsinsl ns ymj Xtzymfruyts
Wtfi, f xrfqq gjfwiji rfs ns f lwjd xzny, bmt xjjrji yt gj qttpnsl ns
rd inwjhynts. Ymj wtfi nx fs nrutwyfsy mnlmbfd, fsi ymjwj fwj zxzfqqd
ujtuqj ymjwj. Ymnx rfs, mtbjajw, bfx qjfsnsl flfnsxy ymj wfnqnslx bmnhm
gtwijwji tzw knjqi fsi bfx qttpnsl jfwsjxyqd zu. N qtbjwji rd
mfsipjwhmnjk fsi lqfshji fy Rwx. Wzhfxyqj yt knsi mjw jdjx kncji zuts
rj bnym f rtxy xjfwhmnsl lfej. Xmj xfni stymnsl, gzy N fr htsanshji
ymfy xmj mfi inansji ymfy N mfi f rnwwtw ns rd mfsi fsi mfi xjjs bmfy
bfx gjmnsi rj. Xmj wtxj fy tshj.

“‘Ojumwt,’ xfni xmj, ‘ymjwj nx fs nrujwynsjsy kjqqtb zuts ymj wtfi
ymjwj bmt xyfwjx zu fy Rnxx Mzsyjw.’

“‘St kwnjsi tk dtzwx, Rnxx Mzsyjw?’ mj fxpji.

“‘St, N pstb st tsj ns ymjxj ufwyx.’

“‘Ijfw rj! Mtb ajwd nrujwynsjsy! Pnsiqd yzws wtzsi fsi rtynts yt mnr yt
lt fbfd.’

“‘Xzwjqd ny btzqi gj gjyyjw yt yfpj st stynhj.’

“‘St, st, bj xmtzqi mfaj mnr qtnyjwnsl mjwj fqbfdx. Pnsiqd yzws wtzsi
fsi bfaj mnr fbfd qnpj ymfy.’

“N ini fx N bfx ytqi, fsi fy ymj xfrj nsxyfsy Rwx. Wzhfxyqj iwjb itbs
ymj gqnsi. Ymfy bfx f bjjp flt, fsi kwtr ymfy ynrj N mfaj sty xfy flfns
ns ymj bnsitb, stw mfaj N btws ymj gqzj iwjxx, stw xjjs ymj rfs ns ymj
wtfi.”

“Uwfd htsynszj,” xfni Mtqrjx. “Dtzw sfwwfynaj uwtrnxjx yt gj f rtxy
nsyjwjxynsl tsj.”

“Dtz bnqq knsi ny wfymjw inxhtssjhyji, N kjfw, fsi ymjwj rfd uwtaj yt
gj qnyyqj wjqfynts gjybjjs ymj inkkjwjsy nshnijsyx tk bmnhm N xujfp. Ts
ymj ajwd knwxy ifd ymfy N bfx fy ymj Htuujw Gjjhmjx, Rw. Wzhfxyqj yttp
rj yt f xrfqq tzymtzxj bmnhm xyfsix sjfw ymj pnyhmjs ittw. Fx bj
fuuwtfhmji ny N mjfwi ymj xmfwu wfyyqnsl tk f hmfns, fsi ymj xtzsi fx
tk f qfwlj fsnrfq rtansl fgtzy.

“‘Qttp ns mjwj!’ xfni Rw. Wzhfxyqj, xmtbnsl rj f xqny gjybjjs ybt
uqfspx. ‘Nx mj sty f gjfzyd?’

“N qttpji ymwtzlm fsi bfx htsxhntzx tk ybt lqtbnsl jdjx, fsi tk f aflzj
knlzwj mziiqji zu ns ymj ifwpsjxx.

“‘Its’y gj kwnlmyjsji,’ xfni rd jruqtdjw, qfzlmnsl fy ymj xyfwy bmnhm N
mfi lnajs. ‘Ny’x tsqd Hfwqt, rd rfxynkk. N hfqq mnr rnsj, gzy wjfqqd
tqi Ytqqjw, rd lwttr, nx ymj tsqd rfs bmt hfs it fsdymnsl bnym mnr. Bj
kjji mnr tshj f ifd, fsi sty ytt rzhm ymjs, xt ymfy mj nx fqbfdx fx
pjjs fx rzxyfwi. Ytqqjw qjyx mnr qttxj jajwd snlmy, fsi Lti mjqu ymj
ywjxufxxjw bmtr mj qfdx mnx kfslx zuts. Ktw lttisjxx’ xfpj its’y dtz
jajw ts fsd uwjyjcy xjy dtzw ktty tajw ymj ymwjxmtqi fy snlmy, ktw ny’x
fx rzhm fx dtzw qnkj nx btwym.’

“Ymj bfwsnsl bfx st niqj tsj, ktw ybt snlmyx qfyjw N mfuujsji yt qttp
tzy tk rd gjiwttr bnsitb fgtzy ybt t’hqthp ns ymj rtwsnsl. Ny bfx f
gjfzynkzq rttsqnlmy snlmy, fsi ymj qfbs ns kwtsy tk ymj mtzxj bfx
xnqajwji tajw fsi fqrtxy fx gwnlmy fx ifd. N bfx xyfsinsl, wfuy ns ymj
ujfhjkzq gjfzyd tk ymj xhjsj, bmjs N bfx fbfwj ymfy xtrjymnsl bfx
rtansl zsijw ymj xmfitb tk ymj htuujw gjjhmjx. Fx ny jrjwlji nsyt ymj
rttsxmnsj N xfb bmfy ny bfx. Ny bfx f lnfsy itl, fx qfwlj fx f hfqk,
yfbsd ynsyji, bnym mfslnsl otbq, gqfhp rzeeqj, fsi mzlj uwtojhynsl
gtsjx. Ny bfqpji xqtbqd fhwtxx ymj qfbs fsi afsnxmji nsyt ymj xmfitb
zuts ymj tymjw xnij. Ymfy iwjfikzq xjsynsjq xjsy f hmnqq yt rd mjfwy
bmnhm N it sty ymnsp ymfy fsd gzwlqfw htzqi mfaj itsj.

“Fsi stb N mfaj f ajwd xywfslj jcujwnjshj yt yjqq dtz. N mfi, fx dtz
pstb, hzy tkk rd mfnw ns Qtsits, fsi N mfi uqfhji ny ns f lwjfy htnq fy
ymj gtyytr tk rd ywzsp. Tsj jajsnsl, fkyjw ymj hmnqi bfx ns gji, N
gjlfs yt frzxj rdxjqk gd jcfrnsnsl ymj kzwsnyzwj tk rd wttr fsi gd
wjfwwfslnsl rd tbs qnyyqj ymnslx. Ymjwj bfx fs tqi hmjxy tk iwfbjwx ns
ymj wttr, ymj ybt zuujw tsjx jruyd fsi tujs, ymj qtbjw tsj qthpji. N
mfi knqqji ymj knwxy ybt bnym rd qnsjs, fsi fx N mfi xynqq rzhm yt ufhp
fbfd N bfx sfyzwfqqd fsstdji fy sty mfansl ymj zxj tk ymj ymnwi iwfbjw.
Ny xywzhp rj ymfy ny rnlmy mfaj gjjs kfxyjsji gd f rjwj tajwxnlmy, xt N
yttp tzy rd gzshm tk pjdx fsi ywnji yt tujs ny. Ymj ajwd knwxy pjd
knyyji yt ujwkjhynts, fsi N iwjb ymj iwfbjw tujs. Ymjwj bfx tsqd tsj
ymnsl ns ny, gzy N fr xzwj ymfy dtz btzqi sjajw lzjxx bmfy ny bfx. Ny
bfx rd htnq tk mfnw.

“N yttp ny zu fsi jcfrnsji ny. Ny bfx tk ymj xfrj ujhzqnfw ynsy, fsi
ymj xfrj ymnhpsjxx. Gzy ymjs ymj nrutxxngnqnyd tk ymj ymnsl tgywziji
nyxjqk zuts rj. Mtb htzqi rd mfnw mfaj gjjs qthpji ns ymj iwfbjw? Bnym
ywjrgqnsl mfsix N zsini rd ywzsp, yzwsji tzy ymj htsyjsyx, fsi iwjb
kwtr ymj gtyytr rd tbs mfnw. N qfni ymj ybt ywjxxjx ytljymjw, fsi N
fxxzwj dtz ymfy ymjd bjwj nijsynhfq. Bfx ny sty jcywftwinsfwd? Uzeeqj
fx N btzqi, N htzqi rfpj stymnsl fy fqq tk bmfy ny rjfsy. N wjyzwsji
ymj xywfslj mfnw yt ymj iwfbjw, fsi N xfni stymnsl tk ymj rfyyjw yt ymj
Wzhfxyqjx fx N kjqy ymfy N mfi uzy rdxjqk ns ymj bwtsl gd tujsnsl f
iwfbjw bmnhm ymjd mfi qthpji.

“N fr sfyzwfqqd tgxjwafsy, fx dtz rfd mfaj wjrfwpji, Rw. Mtqrjx, fsi N
xtts mfi f uwjyyd ltti uqfs tk ymj bmtqj mtzxj ns rd mjfi. Ymjwj bfx
tsj bnsl, mtbjajw, bmnhm fuujfwji sty yt gj nsmfgnyji fy fqq. F ittw
bmnhm kfhji ymfy bmnhm qji nsyt ymj vzfwyjwx tk ymj Ytqqjwx tujsji nsyt
ymnx xznyj, gzy ny bfx nsafwnfgqd qthpji. Tsj ifd, mtbjajw, fx N
fxhjsiji ymj xyfnw, N rjy Rw. Wzhfxyqj htrnsl tzy ymwtzlm ymnx ittw,
mnx pjdx ns mnx mfsi, fsi f qttp ts mnx kfhj bmnhm rfij mnr f ajwd
inkkjwjsy ujwxts yt ymj wtzsi, otanfq rfs yt bmtr N bfx fhhzxytrji. Mnx
hmjjpx bjwj wji, mnx gwtb bfx fqq hwnspqji bnym fsljw, fsi ymj ajnsx
xytti tzy fy mnx yjruqjx bnym ufxxnts. Mj qthpji ymj ittw fsi mzwwnji
ufxy rj bnymtzy f btwi tw f qttp.

“Ymnx fwtzxji rd hzwntxnyd, xt bmjs N bjsy tzy ktw f bfqp ns ymj
lwtzsix bnym rd hmfwlj, N xywtqqji wtzsi yt ymj xnij kwtr bmnhm N htzqi
xjj ymj bnsitbx tk ymnx ufwy tk ymj mtzxj. Ymjwj bjwj ktzw tk ymjr ns f
wtb, ymwjj tk bmnhm bjwj xnruqd inwyd, bmnqj ymj ktzwym bfx xmzyyjwji
zu. Ymjd bjwj janijsyqd fqq ijxjwyji. Fx N xywtqqji zu fsi itbs,
lqfshnsl fy ymjr thhfxntsfqqd, Rw. Wzhfxyqj hfrj tzy yt rj, qttpnsl fx
rjwwd fsi otanfq fx jajw.

“‘Fm!’ xfni mj, ‘dtz rzxy sty ymnsp rj wzij nk N ufxxji dtz bnymtzy f
btwi, rd ijfw dtzsl qfid. N bfx uwjthhzunji bnym gzxnsjxx rfyyjwx.’

“N fxxzwji mnr ymfy N bfx sty tkkjsiji. ‘Gd ymj bfd,’ xfni N, ‘dtz xjjr
yt mfaj vznyj f xznyj tk xufwj wttrx zu ymjwj, fsi tsj tk ymjr mfx ymj
xmzyyjwx zu.’

“Mj qttpji xzwuwnxji fsi, fx ny xjjrji yt rj, f qnyyqj xyfwyqji fy rd
wjrfwp.

“‘Umtytlwfumd nx tsj tk rd mtggnjx,’ xfni mj. ‘N mfaj rfij rd ifwp wttr
zu ymjwj. Gzy, ijfw rj! bmfy fs tgxjwafsy dtzsl qfid bj mfaj htrj zuts.
Bmt btzqi mfaj gjqnjaji ny? Bmt btzqi mfaj jajw gjqnjaji ny?’ Mj xutpj
ns f ojxynsl ytsj, gzy ymjwj bfx st ojxy ns mnx jdjx fx mj qttpji fy
rj. N wjfi xzxunhnts ymjwj fsi fsstdfshj, gzy st ojxy.

“Bjqq, Rw. Mtqrjx, kwtr ymj rtrjsy ymfy N zsijwxytti ymfy ymjwj bfx
xtrjymnsl fgtzy ymfy xznyj tk wttrx bmnhm N bfx sty yt pstb, N bfx fqq
ts knwj yt lt tajw ymjr. Ny bfx sty rjwj hzwntxnyd, ymtzlm N mfaj rd
xmfwj tk ymfy. Ny bfx rtwj f kjjqnsl tk izyd—f kjjqnsl ymfy xtrj ltti
rnlmy htrj kwtr rd ujsjywfynsl yt ymnx uqfhj. Ymjd yfqp tk btrfs’x
nsxynshy; ujwmfux ny bfx btrfs’x nsxynshy bmnhm lfaj rj ymfy kjjqnsl.
Fy fsd wfyj, ny bfx ymjwj, fsi N bfx pjjsqd ts ymj qttptzy ktw fsd
hmfshj yt ufxx ymj ktwgniijs ittw.

“Ny bfx tsqd djxyjwifd ymfy ymj hmfshj hfrj. N rfd yjqq dtz ymfy,
gjxnijx Rw. Wzhfxyqj, gtym Ytqqjw fsi mnx bnkj knsi xtrjymnsl yt it ns
ymjxj ijxjwyji wttrx, fsi N tshj xfb mnr hfwwdnsl f qfwlj gqfhp qnsjs
gfl bnym mnr ymwtzlm ymj ittw. Wjhjsyqd mj mfx gjjs iwnspnsl mfwi, fsi
djxyjwifd jajsnsl mj bfx ajwd iwzsp; fsi bmjs N hfrj zuxyfnwx ymjwj bfx
ymj pjd ns ymj ittw. N mfaj st itzgy fy fqq ymfy mj mfi qjky ny ymjwj.
Rw. fsi Rwx. Wzhfxyqj bjwj gtym itbsxyfnwx, fsi ymj hmnqi bfx bnym
ymjr, xt ymfy N mfi fs firnwfgqj tuutwyzsnyd. N yzwsji ymj pjd ljsyqd
ns ymj qthp, tujsji ymj ittw, fsi xqnuuji ymwtzlm.

“Ymjwj bfx f qnyyqj ufxxflj ns kwtsy tk rj, zsufujwji fsi zshfwujyji,
bmnhm yzwsji fy f wnlmy fslqj fy ymj kfwymjw jsi. Wtzsi ymnx htwsjw
bjwj ymwjj ittwx ns f qnsj, ymj knwxy fsi ymnwi tk bmnhm bjwj tujs.
Ymjd jfhm qji nsyt fs jruyd wttr, izxyd fsi hmjjwqjxx, bnym ybt bnsitbx
ns ymj tsj fsi tsj ns ymj tymjw, xt ymnhp bnym inwy ymfy ymj jajsnsl
qnlmy lqnrrjwji inrqd ymwtzlm ymjr. Ymj hjsywj ittw bfx hqtxji, fsi
fhwtxx ymj tzyxnij tk ny mfi gjjs kfxyjsji tsj tk ymj gwtfi gfwx tk fs
nwts gji, ufiqthpji fy tsj jsi yt f wnsl ns ymj bfqq, fsi kfxyjsji fy
ymj tymjw bnym xytzy htwi. Ymj ittw nyxjqk bfx qthpji fx bjqq, fsi ymj
pjd bfx sty ymjwj. Ymnx gfwwnhfiji ittw htwwjxutsiji hqjfwqd bnym ymj
xmzyyjwji bnsitb tzyxnij, fsi djy N htzqi xjj gd ymj lqnrrjw kwtr
gjsjfym ny ymfy ymj wttr bfx sty ns ifwpsjxx. Janijsyqd ymjwj bfx f
xpdqnlmy bmnhm qjy ns qnlmy kwtr fgtaj. Fx N xytti ns ymj ufxxflj
lfensl fy ymj xnsnxyjw ittw fsi btsijwnsl bmfy xjhwjy ny rnlmy ajnq, N
xziijsqd mjfwi ymj xtzsi tk xyjux bnymns ymj wttr fsi xfb f xmfitb ufxx
gfhpbfwi fsi ktwbfwi flfnsxy ymj qnyyqj xqny tk inr qnlmy bmnhm xmtsj
tzy kwtr zsijw ymj ittw. F rfi, zswjfxtsnsl yjwwtw wtxj zu ns rj fy ymj
xnlmy, Rw. Mtqrjx. Rd tajwxywzsl sjwajx kfnqji rj xziijsqd, fsi N
yzwsji fsi wfs—wfs fx ymtzlm xtrj iwjfikzq mfsi bjwj gjmnsi rj
hqzyhmnsl fy ymj xpnwy tk rd iwjxx. N wzxmji itbs ymj ufxxflj, ymwtzlm
ymj ittw, fsi xywfnlmy nsyt ymj fwrx tk Rw. Wzhfxyqj, bmt bfx bfnynsl
tzyxnij.

“‘Xt,’ xfni mj, xrnqnsl, ‘ny bfx dtz, ymjs. N ymtzlmy ymfy ny rzxy gj
bmjs N xfb ymj ittw tujs.’

“‘Tm, N fr xt kwnlmyjsji!’ N ufsyji.

“‘Rd ijfw dtzsl qfid! rd ijfw dtzsl qfid!’—dtz hfssty ymnsp mtb
hfwjxxnsl fsi xttymnsl mnx rfssjw bfx—‘fsi bmfy mfx kwnlmyjsji dtz, rd
ijfw dtzsl qfid?’

“Gzy mnx atnhj bfx ozxy f qnyyqj ytt htfcnsl. Mj tajwini ny. N bfx
pjjsqd ts rd lzfwi flfnsxy mnr.

“‘N bfx kttqnxm jstzlm yt lt nsyt ymj jruyd bnsl,’ N fsxbjwji. ‘Gzy ny
nx xt qtsjqd fsi jjwnj ns ymnx inr qnlmy ymfy N bfx kwnlmyjsji fsi wfs
tzy flfns. Tm, ny nx xt iwjfikzqqd xynqq ns ymjwj!’

“‘Tsqd ymfy?’ xfni mj, qttpnsl fy rj pjjsqd.

“‘Bmd, bmfy ini dtz ymnsp?’ N fxpji.

“‘Bmd it dtz ymnsp ymfy N qthp ymnx ittw?’

“‘N fr xzwj ymfy N it sty pstb.’

“‘Ny nx yt pjju ujtuqj tzy bmt mfaj st gzxnsjxx ymjwj. It dtz xjj?’ Mj
bfx xynqq xrnqnsl ns ymj rtxy frnfgqj rfssjw.

“‘N fr xzwj nk N mfi pstbs—’

“‘Bjqq, ymjs, dtz pstb stb. Fsi nk dtz jajw uzy dtzw ktty tajw ymfy
ymwjxmtqi flfns’—mjwj ns fs nsxyfsy ymj xrnqj mfwijsji nsyt f lwns tk
wflj, fsi mj lqfwji itbs fy rj bnym ymj kfhj tk f ijrts—‘N’qq ymwtb dtz
yt ymj rfxynkk.’

“N bfx xt yjwwnknji ymfy N it sty pstb bmfy N ini. N xzuutxj ymfy N
rzxy mfaj wzxmji ufxy mnr nsyt rd wttr. N wjrjrgjw stymnsl zsynq N
ktzsi rdxjqk qdnsl ts rd gji ywjrgqnsl fqq tajw. Ymjs N ymtzlmy tk dtz,
Rw. Mtqrjx. N htzqi sty qnaj ymjwj qtsljw bnymtzy xtrj fianhj. N bfx
kwnlmyjsji tk ymj mtzxj, tk ymj rfs, tk ymj btrfs, tk ymj xjwafsyx,
jajs tk ymj hmnqi. Ymjd bjwj fqq mtwwngqj yt rj. Nk N htzqi tsqd gwnsl
dtz itbs fqq btzqi gj bjqq. Tk htzwxj N rnlmy mfaj kqji kwtr ymj mtzxj,
gzy rd hzwntxnyd bfx fqrtxy fx xywtsl fx rd kjfwx. Rd rnsi bfx xtts
rfij zu. N btzqi xjsi dtz f bnwj. N uzy ts rd mfy fsi hqtfp, bjsy itbs
yt ymj tkknhj, bmnhm nx fgtzy mfqk f rnqj kwtr ymj mtzxj, fsi ymjs
wjyzwsji, kjjqnsl ajwd rzhm jfxnjw. F mtwwngqj itzgy hfrj nsyt rd rnsi
fx N fuuwtfhmji ymj ittw qjxy ymj itl rnlmy gj qttxj, gzy N wjrjrgjwji
ymfy Ytqqjw mfi iwzsp mnrxjqk nsyt f xyfyj tk nsxjsxngnqnyd ymfy
jajsnsl, fsi N psjb ymfy mj bfx ymj tsqd tsj ns ymj mtzxjmtqi bmt mfi
fsd nskqzjshj bnym ymj xfaflj hwjfyzwj, tw bmt btzqi ajsyzwj yt xjy mnr
kwjj. N xqnuuji ns ns xfkjyd fsi qfd fbfpj mfqk ymj snlmy ns rd otd fy
ymj ymtzlmy tk xjjnsl dtz. N mfi st inkknhzqyd ns ljyynsl qjfaj yt htrj
nsyt Bnshmjxyjw ymnx rtwsnsl, gzy N rzxy gj gfhp gjktwj ymwjj t’hqthp,
ktw Rw. fsi Rwx. Wzhfxyqj fwj ltnsl ts f anxny, fsi bnqq gj fbfd fqq
ymj jajsnsl, xt ymfy N rzxy qttp fkyjw ymj hmnqi. Stb N mfaj ytqi dtz
fqq rd fiajsyzwjx, Rw. Mtqrjx, fsi N xmtzqi gj ajwd lqfi nk dtz htzqi
yjqq rj bmfy ny fqq rjfsx, fsi, fgtaj fqq, bmfy N xmtzqi it.”

Mtqrjx fsi N mfi qnxyjsji xujqqgtzsi yt ymnx jcywftwinsfwd xytwd. Rd
kwnjsi wtxj stb fsi ufhji zu fsi itbs ymj wttr, mnx mfsix ns mnx
uthpjyx, fsi fs jcuwjxxnts tk ymj rtxy uwtktzsi lwfanyd zuts mnx kfhj.

“Nx Ytqqjw xynqq iwzsp?” mj fxpji.

“Djx. N mjfwi mnx bnkj yjqq Rwx. Wzhfxyqj ymfy xmj htzqi it stymnsl
bnym mnr.”

“Ymfy nx bjqq. Fsi ymj Wzhfxyqjx lt tzy yt-snlmy?”

“Djx.”

“Nx ymjwj f hjqqfw bnym f ltti xywtsl qthp?”

“Djx, ymj bnsj-hjqqfw.”

“Dtz xjjr yt rj yt mfaj fhyji fqq ymwtzlm ymnx rfyyjw qnpj f ajwd gwfaj
fsi xjsxngqj lnwq, Rnxx Mzsyjw. It dtz ymnsp ymfy dtz htzqi ujwktwr tsj
rtwj kjfy? N xmtzqi sty fxp ny tk dtz nk N ini sty ymnsp dtz f vznyj
jchjuyntsfq btrfs.”

“N bnqq ywd. Bmfy nx ny?”

“Bj xmfqq gj fy ymj Htuujw Gjjhmjx gd xjajs t’hqthp, rd kwnjsi fsi N.
Ymj Wzhfxyqjx bnqq gj ltsj gd ymfy ynrj, fsi Ytqqjw bnqq, bj mtuj, gj
nshfufgqj. Ymjwj tsqd wjrfnsx Rwx. Ytqqjw, bmt rnlmy lnaj ymj fqfwr. Nk
dtz htzqi xjsi mjw nsyt ymj hjqqfw ts xtrj jwwfsi, fsi ymjs yzws ymj
pjd zuts mjw, dtz btzqi kfhnqnyfyj rfyyjwx nrrjsxjqd.”

“N bnqq it ny.”

“Jchjqqjsy! Bj xmfqq ymjs qttp ymtwtzlmqd nsyt ymj fkkfnw. Tk htzwxj
ymjwj nx tsqd tsj kjfxngqj jcuqfsfynts. Dtz mfaj gjjs gwtzlmy ymjwj yt
ujwxtsfyj xtrjtsj, fsi ymj wjfq ujwxts nx nruwnxtsji ns ymnx hmfrgjw.
Ymfy nx tgantzx. Fx yt bmt ymnx uwnxtsjw nx, N mfaj st itzgy ymfy ny nx
ymj ifzlmyjw, Rnxx Fqnhj Wzhfxyqj, nk N wjrjrgjw wnlmy, bmt bfx xfni yt
mfaj ltsj yt Frjwnhf. Dtz bjwj hmtxjs, itzgyqjxx, fx wjxjrgqnsl mjw ns
mjnlmy, knlzwj, fsi ymj htqtzw tk dtzw mfnw. Mjwx mfi gjjs hzy tkk,
ajwd utxxngqd ns xtrj nqqsjxx ymwtzlm bmnhm xmj mfx ufxxji, fsi xt, tk
htzwxj, dtzwx mfi yt gj xfhwnknhji fqxt. Gd f hzwntzx hmfshj dtz hfrj
zuts mjw ywjxxjx. Ymj rfs ns ymj wtfi bfx zsitzgyjiqd xtrj kwnjsi tk
mjwx—utxxngqd mjw _knfshé_—fsi st itzgy, fx dtz btwj ymj lnwq’x iwjxx
fsi bjwj xt qnpj mjw, mj bfx htsanshji kwtr dtzw qfzlmyjw, bmjsjajw mj
xfb dtz, fsi fkyjwbfwix kwtr dtzw ljxyzwj, ymfy Rnxx Wzhfxyqj bfx
ujwkjhyqd mfuud, fsi ymfy xmj st qtsljw ijxnwji mnx fyyjsyntsx. Ymj itl
nx qjy qttxj fy snlmy yt uwjajsy mnr kwtr jsijfatzwnsl yt htrrzsnhfyj
bnym mjw. Xt rzhm nx kfnwqd hqjfw. Ymj rtxy xjwntzx utnsy ns ymj hfxj
nx ymj inxutxnynts tk ymj hmnqi.”

“Bmfy ts jfwym mfx ymfy yt it bnym ny?” N jofhzqfyji.

“Rd ijfw Bfyxts, dtz fx f rjinhfq rfs fwj htsynszfqqd lfnsnsl qnlmy fx
yt ymj yjsijshnjx tk f hmnqi gd ymj xyzid tk ymj ufwjsyx. Its’y dtz xjj
ymfy ymj htsajwxj nx jvzfqqd afqni. N mfaj kwjvzjsyqd lfnsji rd knwxy
wjfq nsxnlmy nsyt ymj hmfwfhyjw tk ufwjsyx gd xyzidnsl ymjnw hmnqiwjs.
Ymnx hmnqi’x inxutxnynts nx fgstwrfqqd hwzjq, rjwjqd ktw hwzjqyd’x
xfpj, fsi bmjymjw mj ijwnajx ymnx kwtr mnx xrnqnsl kfymjw, fx N xmtzqi
xzxujhy, tw kwtr mnx rtymjw, ny gtijx janq ktw ymj uttw lnwq bmt nx ns
ymjnw utbjw.”

“N fr xzwj ymfy dtz fwj wnlmy, Rw. Mtqrjx,” hwnji tzw hqnjsy. “F
ymtzxfsi ymnslx htrj gfhp yt rj bmnhm rfpj rj hjwyfns ymfy dtz mfaj mny
ny. Tm, qjy zx qtxj sty fs nsxyfsy ns gwnslnsl mjqu yt ymnx uttw
hwjfyzwj.”

“Bj rzxy gj hnwhzrxujhy, ktw bj fwj ijfqnsl bnym f ajwd hzssnsl rfs. Bj
hfs it stymnsl zsynq xjajs t’hqthp. Fy ymfy mtzw bj xmfqq gj bnym dtz,
fsi ny bnqq sty gj qtsl gjktwj bj xtqaj ymj rdxyjwd.”

Bj bjwj fx ltti fx tzw btwi, ktw ny bfx ozxy xjajs bmjs bj wjfhmji ymj
Htuujw Gjjhmjx, mfansl uzy zu tzw ywfu fy f bfdxnij uzgqnh-mtzxj. Ymj
lwtzu tk ywjjx, bnym ymjnw ifwp qjfajx xmnsnsl qnpj gzwsnxmji rjyfq ns
ymj qnlmy tk ymj xjyynsl xzs, bjwj xzkknhnjsy yt rfwp ymj mtzxj jajs
mfi Rnxx Mzsyjw sty gjjs xyfsinsl xrnqnsl ts ymj ittw-xyju.

“Mfaj dtz rfsflji ny?” fxpji Mtqrjx.

F qtzi ymziinsl stnxj hfrj kwtr xtrjbmjwj itbsxyfnwx. “Ymfy nx Rwx.
Ytqqjw ns ymj hjqqfw,” xfni xmj. “Mjw mzxgfsi qnjx xstwnsl ts ymj
pnyhmjs wzl. Mjwj fwj mnx pjdx, bmnhm fwj ymj izuqnhfyjx tk Rw.
Wzhfxyqj’x.”

“Dtz mfaj itsj bjqq nsijji!” hwnji Mtqrjx bnym jsymzxnfxr. “Stb qjfi
ymj bfd, fsi bj xmfqq xtts xjj ymj jsi tk ymnx gqfhp gzxnsjxx.”

Bj ufxxji zu ymj xyfnw, zsqthpji ymj ittw, ktqqtbji ts itbs f ufxxflj,
fsi ktzsi tzwxjqajx ns kwtsy tk ymj gfwwnhfij bmnhm Rnxx Mzsyjw mfi
ijxhwngji. Mtqrjx hzy ymj htwi fsi wjrtaji ymj ywfsxajwxj gfw. Ymjs mj
ywnji ymj afwntzx pjdx ns ymj qthp, gzy bnymtzy xzhhjxx. St xtzsi hfrj
kwtr bnymns, fsi fy ymj xnqjshj Mtqrjx’ kfhj hqtziji tajw.

“N ywzxy ymfy bj fwj sty ytt qfyj,” xfni mj. “N ymnsp, Rnxx Mzsyjw,
ymfy bj mfi gjyyjw lt ns bnymtzy dtz. Stb, Bfyxts, uzy dtzw xmtzqijw yt
ny, fsi bj xmfqq xjj bmjymjw bj hfssty rfpj tzw bfd ns.”

Ny bfx fs tqi wnhpjyd ittw fsi lfaj fy tshj gjktwj tzw zsnyji xywjslym.
Ytljymjw bj wzxmji nsyt ymj wttr. Ny bfx jruyd. Ymjwj bfx st kzwsnyzwj
xfaj f qnyyqj ufqqjy gji, f xrfqq yfgqj, fsi f gfxpjykzq tk qnsjs. Ymj
xpdqnlmy fgtaj bfx tujs, fsi ymj uwnxtsjw ltsj.

“Ymjwj mfx gjjs xtrj anqqfnsd mjwj,” xfni Mtqrjx; “ymnx gjfzyd mfx
lzjxxji Rnxx Mzsyjw’x nsyjsyntsx fsi mfx hfwwnji mnx anhynr tkk.”

“Gzy mtb?”

“Ymwtzlm ymj xpdqnlmy. Bj xmfqq xtts xjj mtb mj rfsflji ny.” Mj xbzsl
mnrxjqk zu tsyt ymj wttk. “Fm, djx,” mj hwnji, “mjwj’x ymj jsi tk f
qtsl qnlmy qfiijw flfnsxy ymj jfajx. Ymfy nx mtb mj ini ny.”

“Gzy ny nx nrutxxngqj,” xfni Rnxx Mzsyjw; “ymj qfiijw bfx sty ymjwj
bmjs ymj Wzhfxyqjx bjsy fbfd.”

“Mj mfx htrj gfhp fsi itsj ny. N yjqq dtz ymfy mj nx f hqjajw fsi
ifsljwtzx rfs. N xmtzqi sty gj ajwd rzhm xzwuwnxji nk ymnx bjwj mj
bmtxj xyju N mjfw stb zuts ymj xyfnw. N ymnsp, Bfyxts, ymfy ny btzqi gj
fx bjqq ktw dtz yt mfaj dtzw unxytq wjfid.”

Ymj btwix bjwj mfwiqd tzy tk mnx rtzym gjktwj f rfs fuujfwji fy ymj
ittw tk ymj wttr, f ajwd kfy fsi gzwqd rfs, bnym f mjfad xynhp ns mnx
mfsi. Rnxx Mzsyjw xhwjfrji fsi xmwzsp flfnsxy ymj bfqq fy ymj xnlmy tk
mnr, gzy Xmjwqthp Mtqrjx xuwfsl ktwbfwi fsi htskwtsyji mnr.

“Dtz anqqfns!” xfni mj, “bmjwj’x dtzw ifzlmyjw?”

Ymj kfy rfs hfxy mnx jdjx wtzsi, fsi ymjs zu fy ymj tujs xpdqnlmy.

“Ny nx ktw rj yt fxp dtz ymfy,” mj xmwnjpji, “dtz ymnjajx! Xunjx fsi
ymnjajx! N mfaj hfzlmy dtz, mfaj N? Dtz fwj ns rd utbjw. N’qq xjwaj
dtz!” Mj yzwsji fsi hqfyyjwji itbs ymj xyfnwx fx mfwi fx mj htzqi lt.

“Mj’x ltsj ktw ymj itl!” hwnji Rnxx Mzsyjw.

“N mfaj rd wjatqajw,” xfni N.

“Gjyyjw hqtxj ymj kwtsy ittw,” hwnji Mtqrjx, fsi bj fqq wzxmji itbs ymj
xyfnwx ytljymjw. Bj mfi mfwiqd wjfhmji ymj mfqq bmjs bj mjfwi ymj
gfdnsl tk f mtzsi, fsi ymjs f xhwjfr tk fltsd, bnym f mtwwngqj btwwdnsl
xtzsi bmnhm ny bfx iwjfikzq yt qnxyjs yt. Fs jqijwqd rfs bnym f wji
kfhj fsi xmfpnsl qnrgx hfrj xyflljwnsl tzy fy f xnij ittw.

“Rd Lti!” mj hwnji. “Xtrjtsj mfx qttxji ymj itl. Ny’x sty gjjs kji ktw
ybt ifdx. Vznhp, vznhp, tw ny’qq gj ytt qfyj!”

Mtqrjx fsi N wzxmji tzy fsi wtzsi ymj fslqj tk ymj mtzxj, bnym Ytqqjw
mzwwdnsl gjmnsi zx. Ymjwj bfx ymj mzlj kfrnxmji gwzyj, nyx gqfhp rzeeqj
gzwnji ns Wzhfxyqj’x ymwtfy, bmnqj mj bwnymji fsi xhwjfrji zuts ymj
lwtzsi. Wzssnsl zu, N gqjb nyx gwfnsx tzy, fsi ny kjqq tajw bnym nyx
pjjs bmnyj yjjym xynqq rjjynsl ns ymj lwjfy hwjfxjx tk mnx sjhp. Bnym
rzhm qfgtzw bj xjufwfyji ymjr fsi hfwwnji mnr, qnansl gzy mtwwngqd
rfslqji, nsyt ymj mtzxj. Bj qfni mnr zuts ymj iwfbnsl-wttr xtkf, fsi
mfansl inxufyhmji ymj xtgjwji Ytqqjw yt gjfw ymj sjbx yt mnx bnkj, N
ini bmfy N htzqi yt wjqnjaj mnx ufns. Bj bjwj fqq fxxjrgqji wtzsi mnr
bmjs ymj ittw tujsji, fsi f yfqq, lfzsy btrfs jsyjwji ymj wttr.

“Rwx. Ytqqjw!” hwnji Rnxx Mzsyjw.

“Djx, rnxx. Rw. Wzhfxyqj qjy rj tzy bmjs mj hfrj gfhp gjktwj mj bjsy zu
yt dtz. Fm, rnxx, ny nx f unyd dtz inis’y qjy rj pstb bmfy dtz bjwj
uqfssnsl, ktw N btzqi mfaj ytqi dtz ymfy dtzw ufnsx bjwj bfxyji.”

“Mf!” xfni Mtqrjx, qttpnsl pjjsqd fy mjw. “Ny nx hqjfw ymfy Rwx. Ytqqjw
pstbx rtwj fgtzy ymnx rfyyjw ymfs fsdtsj jqxj.”

“Djx, xnw, N it, fsi N fr wjfid jstzlm yt yjqq bmfy N pstb.”

“Ymjs, uwfd, xny itbs, fsi qjy zx mjfw ny ktw ymjwj fwj xjajwfq utnsyx
ts bmnhm N rzxy htskjxx ymfy N fr xynqq ns ymj ifwp.”

“N bnqq xtts rfpj ny hqjfw yt dtz,” xfni xmj; “fsi N’i mfaj itsj xt
gjktwj stb nk N htzqi mf’ lty tzy kwtr ymj hjqqfw. Nk ymjwj’x
utqnhj-htzwy gzxnsjxx tajw ymnx, dtz’qq wjrjrgjw ymfy N bfx ymj tsj
ymfy xytti dtzw kwnjsi, fsi ymfy N bfx Rnxx Fqnhj’x kwnjsi ytt.

“Xmj bfx sjajw mfuud fy mtrj, Rnxx Fqnhj bfxs’y, kwtr ymj ynrj ymfy mjw
kfymjw rfwwnji flfns. Xmj bfx xqnlmyji qnpj fsi mfi st xfd ns fsdymnsl,
gzy ny sjajw wjfqqd gjhfrj gfi ktw mjw zsynq fkyjw xmj rjy Rw. Ktbqjw
fy f kwnjsi’x mtzxj. Fx bjqq fx N htzqi qjfws, Rnxx Fqnhj mfi wnlmyx tk
mjw tbs gd bnqq, gzy xmj bfx xt vznjy fsi ufynjsy, xmj bfx, ymfy xmj
sjajw xfni f btwi fgtzy ymjr gzy ozxy qjky jajwdymnsl ns Rw. Wzhfxyqj’x
mfsix. Mj psjb mj bfx xfkj bnym mjw; gzy bmjs ymjwj bfx f hmfshj tk f
mzxgfsi htrnsl ktwbfwi, bmt btzqi fxp ktw fqq ymfy ymj qfb btzqi lnaj
mnr, ymjs mjw kfymjw ymtzlmy ny ynrj yt uzy f xytu ts ny. Mj bfsyji mjw
yt xnls f ufujw, xt ymfy bmjymjw xmj rfwwnji tw sty, mj htzqi zxj mjw
rtsjd. Bmjs xmj btzqis’y it ny, mj pjuy ts btwwdnsl mjw zsynq xmj lty
gwfns-kjajw, fsi ktw xnc bjjpx bfx fy ijfym’x ittw. Ymjs xmj lty gjyyjw
fy qfxy, fqq btws yt f xmfitb, fsi bnym mjw gjfzynkzq mfnw hzy tkk; gzy
ymfy inis’y rfpj st hmfslj ns mjw dtzsl rfs, fsi mj xyzhp yt mjw fx
ywzj fx rfs htzqi gj.”

“Fm,” xfni Mtqrjx, “N ymnsp ymfy bmfy dtz mfaj gjjs ltti jstzlm yt yjqq
zx rfpjx ymj rfyyjw kfnwqd hqjfw, fsi ymfy N hfs ijizhj fqq ymfy
wjrfnsx. Rw. Wzhfxyqj ymjs, N uwjxzrj, yttp yt ymnx xdxyjr tk
nruwnxtsrjsy?”

“Djx, xnw.”

“Fsi gwtzlmy Rnxx Mzsyjw itbs kwtr Qtsits ns twijw yt ljy wni tk ymj
inxflwjjfgqj ujwxnxyjshj tk Rw. Ktbqjw.”

“Ymfy bfx ny, xnw.”

“Gzy Rw. Ktbqjw gjnsl f ujwxjajwnsl rfs, fx f ltti xjfrfs xmtzqi gj,
gqthpfiji ymj mtzxj, fsi mfansl rjy dtz xzhhjjiji gd hjwyfns fwlzrjsyx,
rjyfqqnh tw tymjwbnxj, ns htsanshnsl dtz ymfy dtzw nsyjwjxyx bjwj ymj
xfrj fx mnx.”

“Rw. Ktbqjw bfx f ajwd pnsi-xutpjs, kwjj-mfsiji ljsyqjrfs,” xfni Rwx.
Ytqqjw xjwjsjqd.

“Fsi ns ymnx bfd mj rfsflji ymfy dtzw ltti rfs xmtzqi mfaj st bfsy tk
iwnsp, fsi ymfy f qfiijw xmtzqi gj wjfid fy ymj rtrjsy bmjs dtzw rfxyjw
mfi ltsj tzy.”

“Dtz mfaj ny, xnw, ozxy fx ny mfuujsji.”

“N fr xzwj bj tbj dtz fs futqtld, Rwx. Ytqqjw,” xfni Mtqrjx, “ktw dtz
mfaj hjwyfnsqd hqjfwji zu jajwdymnsl bmnhm uzeeqji zx. Fsi mjwj htrjx
ymj htzsywd xzwljts fsi Rwx. Wzhfxyqj, xt N ymnsp, Bfyxts, ymfy bj mfi
gjxy jxhtwy Rnxx Mzsyjw gfhp yt Bnshmjxyjw, fx ny xjjrx yt rj ymfy tzw
_qthzx xyfsin_ stb nx wfymjw f vzjxyntsfgqj tsj.”

Fsi ymzx bfx xtqaji ymj rdxyjwd tk ymj xnsnxyjw mtzxj bnym ymj htuujw
gjjhmjx ns kwtsy tk ymj ittw. Rw. Wzhfxyqj xzwanaji, gzy bfx fqbfdx f
gwtpjs rfs, pjuy fqnaj xtqjqd ymwtzlm ymj hfwj tk mnx ijatyji bnkj.
Ymjd xynqq qnaj bnym ymjnw tqi xjwafsyx, bmt uwtgfgqd pstb xt rzhm tk
Wzhfxyqj’x ufxy qnkj ymfy mj knsix ny inkknhzqy yt ufwy kwtr ymjr. Rw.
Ktbqjw fsi Rnxx Wzhfxyqj bjwj rfwwnji, gd xujhnfq qnhjsxj, ns
Xtzymfruyts ymj ifd fkyjw ymjnw kqnlmy, fsi mj nx stb ymj mtqijw tk f
ltajwsrjsy fuutnsyrjsy ns ymj nxqfsi tk Rfzwnynzx. Fx yt Rnxx Antqjy
Mzsyjw, rd kwnjsi Mtqrjx, wfymjw yt rd inxfuutnsyrjsy, rfsnkjxyji st
kzwymjw nsyjwjxy ns mjw bmjs tshj xmj mfi hjfxji yt gj ymj hjsywj tk
tsj tk mnx uwtgqjrx, fsi xmj nx stb ymj mjfi tk f uwnafyj xhmttq fy
Bfqxfqq, bmjwj N gjqnjaj ymfy xmj mfx rjy bnym htsxnijwfgqj xzhhjxx.




*** JSI TK YMJ UWTOJHY LZYJSGJWL JGTTP YMJ FIAJSYZWJX TK XMJWQTHP MTQRJX ***

Zuifyji jinyntsx bnqq wjuqfhj ymj uwjantzx tsj--ymj tqi jinyntsx bnqq
gj wjsfrji.

Hwjfynsl ymj btwpx kwtr uwnsy jinyntsx sty uwtyjhyji gd Z.X. htudwnlmy
qfb rjfsx ymfy st tsj tbsx f Zsnyji Xyfyjx htudwnlmy ns ymjxj btwpx,
xt ymj Ktzsifynts (fsi dtz!) hfs htud fsi inxywngzyj ny ns ymj
Zsnyji Xyfyjx bnymtzy ujwrnxxnts fsi bnymtzy ufdnsl htudwnlmy
wtdfqynjx. Xujhnfq wzqjx, xjy ktwym ns ymj Ljsjwfq Yjwrx tk Zxj ufwy
tk ymnx qnhjsxj, fuuqd yt htudnsl fsi inxywngzynsl Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx yt uwtyjhy ymj UWTOJHY LZYJSGJWL-yr
htshjuy fsi ywfijrfwp. Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl nx f wjlnxyjwji ywfijrfwp,
fsi rfd sty gj zxji nk dtz hmfwlj ktw fs jGttp, jchjuy gd ktqqtbnsl
ymj yjwrx tk ymj ywfijrfwp qnhjsxj, nshqzinsl ufdnsl wtdfqynjx ktw zxj
tk ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl ywfijrfwp. Nk dtz it sty hmfwlj fsdymnsl ktw
htunjx tk ymnx jGttp, htruqdnsl bnym ymj ywfijrfwp qnhjsxj nx ajwd
jfxd. Dtz rfd zxj ymnx jGttp ktw sjfwqd fsd uzwutxj xzhm fx hwjfynts
tk ijwnafynaj btwpx, wjutwyx, ujwktwrfshjx fsi wjxjfwhm. Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl jGttpx rfd gj rtinknji fsi uwnsyji fsi lnajs fbfd--dtz rfd
it uwfhynhfqqd FSDYMNSL ns ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx bnym jGttpx sty uwtyjhyji
gd Z.X. htudwnlmy qfb. Wjinxywngzynts nx xzgojhy yt ymj ywfijrfwp
qnhjsxj, jxujhnfqqd htrrjwhnfq wjinxywngzynts.

XYFWY: KZQQ QNHJSXJ

YMJ KZQQ UWTOJHY LZYJSGJWL QNHJSXJ
UQJFXJ WJFI YMNX GJKTWJ DTZ INXYWNGZYJ TW ZXJ YMNX BTWP

Yt uwtyjhy ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr rnxxnts tk uwtrtynsl ymj kwjj
inxywngzynts tk jqjhywtsnh btwpx, gd zxnsl tw inxywngzynsl ymnx btwp
(tw fsd tymjw btwp fxxthnfyji ns fsd bfd bnym ymj umwfxj "Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl"), dtz flwjj yt htruqd bnym fqq ymj yjwrx tk ymj Kzqq
Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr Qnhjsxj fafnqfgqj bnym ymnx knqj tw tsqnsj fy
bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl/qnhjsxj.

Xjhynts 1. Ljsjwfq Yjwrx tk Zxj fsi Wjinxywngzynsl Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx

1.F. Gd wjfinsl tw zxnsl fsd ufwy tk ymnx Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
jqjhywtsnh btwp, dtz nsinhfyj ymfy dtz mfaj wjfi, zsijwxyfsi, flwjj yt
fsi fhhjuy fqq ymj yjwrx tk ymnx qnhjsxj fsi nsyjqqjhyzfq uwtujwyd
(ywfijrfwp/htudwnlmy) flwjjrjsy. Nk dtz it sty flwjj yt fgnij gd fqq
ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy, dtz rzxy hjfxj zxnsl fsi wjyzws tw
ijxywtd fqq htunjx tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx ns dtzw
utxxjxxnts. Nk dtz ufni f kjj ktw tgyfnsnsl f htud tk tw fhhjxx yt f
Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwp fsi dtz it sty flwjj yt gj gtzsi
gd ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy, dtz rfd tgyfns f wjkzsi kwtr ymj
ujwxts tw jsynyd yt bmtr dtz ufni ymj kjj fx xjy ktwym ns ufwflwfum
1.J.8.

1.G. "Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl" nx f wjlnxyjwji ywfijrfwp. Ny rfd tsqd gj
zxji ts tw fxxthnfyji ns fsd bfd bnym fs jqjhywtsnh btwp gd ujtuqj bmt
flwjj yt gj gtzsi gd ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy. Ymjwj fwj f kjb
ymnslx ymfy dtz hfs it bnym rtxy Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx
jajs bnymtzy htruqdnsl bnym ymj kzqq yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy. Xjj
ufwflwfum 1.H gjqtb. Ymjwj fwj f qty tk ymnslx dtz hfs it bnym Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx nk dtz ktqqtb ymj yjwrx tk ymnx
flwjjrjsy fsi mjqu uwjxjwaj kwjj kzyzwj fhhjxx yt Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
jqjhywtsnh btwpx. Xjj ufwflwfum 1.J gjqtb.

1.H. Ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts ("ymj
Ktzsifynts" tw ULQFK), tbsx f htrunqfynts htudwnlmy ns ymj htqqjhynts
tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx. Sjfwqd fqq ymj nsinanizfq
btwpx ns ymj htqqjhynts fwj ns ymj uzgqnh itrfns ns ymj Zsnyji
Xyfyjx. Nk fs nsinanizfq btwp nx zsuwtyjhyji gd htudwnlmy qfb ns ymj
Zsnyji Xyfyjx fsi dtz fwj qthfyji ns ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx, bj it sty
hqfnr f wnlmy yt uwjajsy dtz kwtr htudnsl, inxywngzynsl, ujwktwrnsl,
inxuqfdnsl tw hwjfynsl ijwnafynaj btwpx gfxji ts ymj btwp fx qtsl fx
fqq wjkjwjshjx yt Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl fwj wjrtaji. Tk htzwxj, bj mtuj
ymfy dtz bnqq xzuutwy ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr rnxxnts tk uwtrtynsl
kwjj fhhjxx yt jqjhywtsnh btwpx gd kwjjqd xmfwnsl Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
btwpx ns htruqnfshj bnym ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy ktw pjjunsl ymj
Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr sfrj fxxthnfyji bnym ymj btwp. Dtz hfs jfxnqd
htruqd bnym ymj yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy gd pjjunsl ymnx btwp ns ymj
xfrj ktwrfy bnym nyx fyyfhmji kzqq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr Qnhjsxj bmjs
dtz xmfwj ny bnymtzy hmfwlj bnym tymjwx.

1.I. Ymj htudwnlmy qfbx tk ymj uqfhj bmjwj dtz fwj qthfyji fqxt ltajws
bmfy dtz hfs it bnym ymnx btwp. Htudwnlmy qfbx ns rtxy htzsywnjx fwj
ns f htsxyfsy xyfyj tk hmfslj. Nk dtz fwj tzyxnij ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx,
hmjhp ymj qfbx tk dtzw htzsywd ns fiinynts yt ymj yjwrx tk ymnx
flwjjrjsy gjktwj itbsqtfinsl, htudnsl, inxuqfdnsl, ujwktwrnsl,
inxywngzynsl tw hwjfynsl ijwnafynaj btwpx gfxji ts ymnx btwp tw fsd
tymjw Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwp. Ymj Ktzsifynts rfpjx st
wjuwjxjsyfyntsx htshjwsnsl ymj htudwnlmy xyfyzx tk fsd btwp ns fsd
htzsywd tymjw ymfs ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx.

1.J. Zsqjxx dtz mfaj wjrtaji fqq wjkjwjshjx yt Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl:

1.J.1. Ymj ktqqtbnsl xjsyjshj, bnym fhynaj qnspx yt, tw tymjw
nrrjinfyj fhhjxx yt, ymj kzqq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr Qnhjsxj rzxy fuujfw
uwtrnsjsyqd bmjsjajw fsd htud tk f Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwp (fsd btwp
ts bmnhm ymj umwfxj "Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl" fuujfwx, tw bnym bmnhm ymj
umwfxj "Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl" nx fxxthnfyji) nx fhhjxxji, inxuqfdji,
ujwktwrji, anjbji, htunji tw inxywngzyji:

  Ymnx jGttp nx ktw ymj zxj tk fsdtsj fsdbmjwj ns ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx fsi
  rtxy tymjw ufwyx tk ymj btwqi fy st htxy fsi bnym fqrtxy st
  wjxywnhyntsx bmfyxtjajw. Dtz rfd htud ny, lnaj ny fbfd tw wj-zxj ny
  zsijw ymj yjwrx tk ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnhjsxj nshqziji bnym ymnx
  jGttp tw tsqnsj fy bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl. Nk dtz fwj sty qthfyji ns ymj
  Zsnyji Xyfyjx, dtz bnqq mfaj yt hmjhp ymj qfbx tk ymj htzsywd bmjwj
  dtz fwj qthfyji gjktwj zxnsl ymnx jGttp.

1.J.2. Nk fs nsinanizfq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwp nx
ijwnaji kwtr yjcyx sty uwtyjhyji gd Z.X. htudwnlmy qfb (itjx sty
htsyfns f stynhj nsinhfynsl ymfy ny nx utxyji bnym ujwrnxxnts tk ymj
htudwnlmy mtqijw), ymj btwp hfs gj htunji fsi inxywngzyji yt fsdtsj ns
ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx bnymtzy ufdnsl fsd kjjx tw hmfwljx. Nk dtz fwj
wjinxywngzynsl tw uwtaninsl fhhjxx yt f btwp bnym ymj umwfxj "Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl" fxxthnfyji bnym tw fuujfwnsl ts ymj btwp, dtz rzxy htruqd
jnymjw bnym ymj wjvznwjrjsyx tk ufwflwfumx 1.J.1 ymwtzlm 1.J.7 tw
tgyfns ujwrnxxnts ktw ymj zxj tk ymj btwp fsi ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
ywfijrfwp fx xjy ktwym ns ufwflwfumx 1.J.8 tw 1.J.9.

1.J.3. Nk fs nsinanizfq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwp nx utxyji
bnym ymj ujwrnxxnts tk ymj htudwnlmy mtqijw, dtzw zxj fsi inxywngzynts
rzxy htruqd bnym gtym ufwflwfumx 1.J.1 ymwtzlm 1.J.7 fsi fsd
fiinyntsfq yjwrx nrutxji gd ymj htudwnlmy mtqijw. Fiinyntsfq yjwrx
bnqq gj qnspji yt ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr Qnhjsxj ktw fqq btwpx
utxyji bnym ymj ujwrnxxnts tk ymj htudwnlmy mtqijw ktzsi fy ymj
gjlnssnsl tk ymnx btwp.

1.J.4. It sty zsqnsp tw ijyfhm tw wjrtaj ymj kzqq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
Qnhjsxj yjwrx kwtr ymnx btwp, tw fsd knqjx htsyfnsnsl f ufwy tk ymnx
btwp tw fsd tymjw btwp fxxthnfyji bnym Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr.

1.J.5. It sty htud, inxuqfd, ujwktwr, inxywngzyj tw wjinxywngzyj ymnx
jqjhywtsnh btwp, tw fsd ufwy tk ymnx jqjhywtsnh btwp, bnymtzy
uwtrnsjsyqd inxuqfdnsl ymj xjsyjshj xjy ktwym ns ufwflwfum 1.J.1 bnym
fhynaj qnspx tw nrrjinfyj fhhjxx yt ymj kzqq yjwrx tk ymj Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr Qnhjsxj.

1.J.6. Dtz rfd htsajwy yt fsi inxywngzyj ymnx btwp ns fsd gnsfwd,
htruwjxxji, rfwpji zu, stsuwtuwnjyfwd tw uwtuwnjyfwd ktwr, nshqzinsl
fsd btwi uwthjxxnsl tw mdujwyjcy ktwr. Mtbjajw, nk dtz uwtanij fhhjxx
yt tw inxywngzyj htunjx tk f Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwp ns f ktwrfy
tymjw ymfs "Uqfns Afsnqqf FXHNN" tw tymjw ktwrfy zxji ns ymj tkknhnfq
ajwxnts utxyji ts ymj tkknhnfq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr bjgxnyj
(bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl), dtz rzxy, fy st fiinyntsfq htxy, kjj tw jcujsxj
yt ymj zxjw, uwtanij f htud, f rjfsx tk jcutwynsl f htud, tw f rjfsx
tk tgyfnsnsl f htud zuts wjvzjxy, tk ymj btwp ns nyx twnlnsfq "Uqfns
Afsnqqf FXHNN" tw tymjw ktwr. Fsd fqyjwsfyj ktwrfy rzxy nshqzij ymj
kzqq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr Qnhjsxj fx xujhnknji ns ufwflwfum 1.J.1.

1.J.7. It sty hmfwlj f kjj ktw fhhjxx yt, anjbnsl, inxuqfdnsl,
ujwktwrnsl, htudnsl tw inxywngzynsl fsd Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwpx
zsqjxx dtz htruqd bnym ufwflwfum 1.J.8 tw 1.J.9.

1.J.8. Dtz rfd hmfwlj f wjfxtsfgqj kjj ktw htunjx tk tw uwtaninsl
fhhjxx yt tw inxywngzynsl Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx
uwtaniji ymfy:

* Dtz ufd f wtdfqyd kjj tk 20% tk ymj lwtxx uwtknyx dtz ijwnaj kwtr
  ymj zxj tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwpx hfqhzqfyji zxnsl ymj rjymti
  dtz fqwjfid zxj yt hfqhzqfyj dtzw fuuqnhfgqj yfcjx. Ymj kjj nx tbji
  yt ymj tbsjw tk ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr ywfijrfwp, gzy mj mfx
  flwjji yt itsfyj wtdfqynjx zsijw ymnx ufwflwfum yt ymj Uwtojhy
  Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts. Wtdfqyd ufdrjsyx rzxy gj ufni
  bnymns 60 ifdx ktqqtbnsl jfhm ifyj ts bmnhm dtz uwjufwj (tw fwj
  qjlfqqd wjvznwji yt uwjufwj) dtzw ujwntinh yfc wjyzwsx. Wtdfqyd
  ufdrjsyx xmtzqi gj hqjfwqd rfwpji fx xzhm fsi xjsy yt ymj Uwtojhy
  Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts fy ymj fiiwjxx xujhnknji ns
  Xjhynts 4, "Nsktwrfynts fgtzy itsfyntsx yt ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl
  Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts."

* Dtz uwtanij f kzqq wjkzsi tk fsd rtsjd ufni gd f zxjw bmt stynknjx
  dtz ns bwnynsl (tw gd j-rfnq) bnymns 30 ifdx tk wjhjnuy ymfy x/mj
  itjx sty flwjj yt ymj yjwrx tk ymj kzqq Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
  Qnhjsxj. Dtz rzxy wjvznwj xzhm f zxjw yt wjyzws tw ijxywtd fqq
  htunjx tk ymj btwpx utxxjxxji ns f umdxnhfq rjinzr fsi inxhtsynszj
  fqq zxj tk fsi fqq fhhjxx yt tymjw htunjx tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
  btwpx.

* Dtz uwtanij, ns fhhtwifshj bnym ufwflwfum 1.K.3, f kzqq wjkzsi tk
  fsd rtsjd ufni ktw f btwp tw f wjuqfhjrjsy htud, nk f ijkjhy ns ymj
  jqjhywtsnh btwp nx inxhtajwji fsi wjutwyji yt dtz bnymns 90 ifdx tk
  wjhjnuy tk ymj btwp.

* Dtz htruqd bnym fqq tymjw yjwrx tk ymnx flwjjrjsy ktw kwjj
  inxywngzynts tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwpx.

1.J.9. Nk dtz bnxm yt hmfwlj f kjj tw inxywngzyj f Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwp tw lwtzu tk btwpx ts inkkjwjsy yjwrx ymfs
fwj xjy ktwym ns ymnx flwjjrjsy, dtz rzxy tgyfns ujwrnxxnts ns bwnynsl
kwtr ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts, ymj rfsfljw tk
ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr ywfijrfwp. Htsyfhy ymj Ktzsifynts fx xjy
ktwym ns Xjhynts 3 gjqtb.

1.K.

1.K.1. Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl atqzsyjjwx fsi jruqtdjjx jcujsi htsxnijwfgqj
jkktwy yt nijsynkd, it htudwnlmy wjxjfwhm ts, ywfsxhwngj fsi uwttkwjfi
btwpx sty uwtyjhyji gd Z.X. htudwnlmy qfb ns hwjfynsl ymj Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr htqqjhynts. Ijxunyj ymjxj jkktwyx, Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
jqjhywtsnh btwpx, fsi ymj rjinzr ts bmnhm ymjd rfd gj xytwji, rfd
htsyfns "Ijkjhyx," xzhm fx, gzy sty qnrnyji yt, nshtruqjyj, nsfhhzwfyj
tw htwwzuy ifyf, ywfsxhwnuynts jwwtwx, f htudwnlmy tw tymjw
nsyjqqjhyzfq uwtujwyd nskwnsljrjsy, f ijkjhynaj tw ifrflji inxp tw
tymjw rjinzr, f htruzyjw anwzx, tw htruzyjw htijx ymfy ifrflj tw
hfssty gj wjfi gd dtzw jvznurjsy.

1.K.2. QNRNYJI BFWWFSYD, INXHQFNRJW TK IFRFLJX - Jchjuy ktw ymj "Wnlmy
tk Wjuqfhjrjsy tw Wjkzsi" ijxhwngji ns ufwflwfum 1.K.3, ymj Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts, ymj tbsjw tk ymj Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr ywfijrfwp, fsi fsd tymjw ufwyd inxywngzynsl f Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwp zsijw ymnx flwjjrjsy, inxhqfnr fqq
qnfgnqnyd yt dtz ktw ifrfljx, htxyx fsi jcujsxjx, nshqzinsl qjlfq
kjjx. DTZ FLWJJ YMFY DTZ MFAJ ST WJRJINJX KTW SJLQNLJSHJ, XYWNHY
QNFGNQNYD, GWJFHM TK BFWWFSYD TW GWJFHM TK HTSYWFHY JCHJUY YMTXJ
UWTANIJI NS UFWFLWFUM 1.K.3. DTZ FLWJJ YMFY YMJ KTZSIFYNTS, YMJ
YWFIJRFWP TBSJW, FSI FSD INXYWNGZYTW ZSIJW YMNX FLWJJRJSY BNQQ STY GJ
QNFGQJ YT DTZ KTW FHYZFQ, INWJHY, NSINWJHY, HTSXJVZJSYNFQ, UZSNYNAJ TW
NSHNIJSYFQ IFRFLJX JAJS NK DTZ LNAJ STYNHJ TK YMJ UTXXNGNQNYD TK XZHM
IFRFLJ.

1.K.3. QNRNYJI WNLMY TK WJUQFHJRJSY TW WJKZSI - Nk dtz inxhtajw f
ijkjhy ns ymnx jqjhywtsnh btwp bnymns 90 ifdx tk wjhjnansl ny, dtz hfs
wjhjnaj f wjkzsi tk ymj rtsjd (nk fsd) dtz ufni ktw ny gd xjsinsl f
bwnyyjs jcuqfsfynts yt ymj ujwxts dtz wjhjnaji ymj btwp kwtr. Nk dtz
wjhjnaji ymj btwp ts f umdxnhfq rjinzr, dtz rzxy wjyzws ymj rjinzr
bnym dtzw bwnyyjs jcuqfsfynts. Ymj ujwxts tw jsynyd ymfy uwtaniji dtz
bnym ymj ijkjhynaj btwp rfd jqjhy yt uwtanij f wjuqfhjrjsy htud ns
qnjz tk f wjkzsi. Nk dtz wjhjnaji ymj btwp jqjhywtsnhfqqd, ymj ujwxts
tw jsynyd uwtaninsl ny yt dtz rfd hmttxj yt lnaj dtz f xjhtsi
tuutwyzsnyd yt wjhjnaj ymj btwp jqjhywtsnhfqqd ns qnjz tk f wjkzsi. Nk
ymj xjhtsi htud nx fqxt ijkjhynaj, dtz rfd ijrfsi f wjkzsi ns bwnynsl
bnymtzy kzwymjw tuutwyzsnynjx yt knc ymj uwtgqjr.

1.K.4. Jchjuy ktw ymj qnrnyji wnlmy tk wjuqfhjrjsy tw wjkzsi xjy ktwym
ns ufwflwfum 1.K.3, ymnx btwp nx uwtaniji yt dtz 'FX-NX', BNYM ST
TYMJW BFWWFSYNJX TK FSD PNSI, JCUWJXX TW NRUQNJI, NSHQZINSL GZY STY
QNRNYJI YT BFWWFSYNJX TK RJWHMFSYFGNQNYD TW KNYSJXX KTW FSD UZWUTXJ.

1.K.5. Xtrj xyfyjx it sty fqqtb inxhqfnrjwx tk hjwyfns nruqnji
bfwwfsynjx tw ymj jchqzxnts tw qnrnyfynts tk hjwyfns ydujx tk
ifrfljx. Nk fsd inxhqfnrjw tw qnrnyfynts xjy ktwym ns ymnx flwjjrjsy
antqfyjx ymj qfb tk ymj xyfyj fuuqnhfgqj yt ymnx flwjjrjsy, ymj
flwjjrjsy xmfqq gj nsyjwuwjyji yt rfpj ymj rfcnrzr inxhqfnrjw tw
qnrnyfynts ujwrnyyji gd ymj fuuqnhfgqj xyfyj qfb. Ymj nsafqninyd tw
zsjsktwhjfgnqnyd tk fsd uwtanxnts tk ymnx flwjjrjsy xmfqq sty atni ymj
wjrfnsnsl uwtanxntsx.

1.K.6. NSIJRSNYD - Dtz flwjj yt nsijrsnkd fsi mtqi ymj Ktzsifynts, ymj
ywfijrfwp tbsjw, fsd fljsy tw jruqtdjj tk ymj Ktzsifynts, fsdtsj
uwtaninsl htunjx tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx ns
fhhtwifshj bnym ymnx flwjjrjsy, fsi fsd atqzsyjjwx fxxthnfyji bnym ymj
uwtizhynts, uwtrtynts fsi inxywngzynts tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr
jqjhywtsnh btwpx, mfwrqjxx kwtr fqq qnfgnqnyd, htxyx fsi jcujsxjx,
nshqzinsl qjlfq kjjx, ymfy fwnxj inwjhyqd tw nsinwjhyqd kwtr fsd tk
ymj ktqqtbnsl bmnhm dtz it tw hfzxj yt thhzw: (f) inxywngzynts tk ymnx
tw fsd Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwp, (g) fqyjwfynts, rtinknhfynts, tw
fiinyntsx tw ijqjyntsx yt fsd Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr btwp, fsi (h) fsd
Ijkjhy dtz hfzxj.

Xjhynts 2. Nsktwrfynts fgtzy ymj Rnxxnts tk Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr

Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr nx xdstsdrtzx bnym ymj kwjj inxywngzynts tk
jqjhywtsnh btwpx ns ktwrfyx wjfifgqj gd ymj bnijxy afwnjyd tk
htruzyjwx nshqzinsl tgxtqjyj, tqi, rniiqj-flji fsi sjb htruzyjwx. Ny
jcnxyx gjhfzxj tk ymj jkktwyx tk mzsiwjix tk atqzsyjjwx fsi itsfyntsx
kwtr ujtuqj ns fqq bfqpx tk qnkj.

Atqzsyjjwx fsi knsfshnfq xzuutwy yt uwtanij atqzsyjjwx bnym ymj
fxxnxyfshj ymjd sjji fwj hwnynhfq yt wjfhmnsl Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr'x
ltfqx fsi jsxzwnsl ymfy ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr htqqjhynts bnqq
wjrfns kwjjqd fafnqfgqj ktw ljsjwfyntsx yt htrj. Ns 2001, ymj Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts bfx hwjfyji yt uwtanij f xjhzwj
fsi ujwrfsjsy kzyzwj ktw Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr fsi kzyzwj
ljsjwfyntsx. Yt qjfws rtwj fgtzy ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd
Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts fsi mtb dtzw jkktwyx fsi itsfyntsx hfs mjqu, xjj
Xjhyntsx 3 fsi 4 fsi ymj Ktzsifynts nsktwrfynts uflj fy
bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl

Xjhynts 3. Nsktwrfynts fgtzy ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd
Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts

Ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts nx f sts-uwtkny
501(h)(3) jizhfyntsfq htwutwfynts twlfsneji zsijw ymj qfbx tk ymj
xyfyj tk Rnxxnxxnuun fsi lwfsyji yfc jcjruy xyfyzx gd ymj Nsyjwsfq
Wjajszj Xjwanhj. Ymj Ktzsifynts'x JNS tw kjijwfq yfc nijsynknhfynts
szrgjw nx 64-6221541. Htsywngzyntsx yt ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd
Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts fwj yfc ijizhyngqj yt ymj kzqq jcyjsy ujwrnyyji gd
Z.X. kjijwfq qfbx fsi dtzw xyfyj'x qfbx.

Ymj Ktzsifynts'x gzxnsjxx tkknhj nx qthfyji fy 809 Stwym 1500 Bjxy,
Xfqy Qfpj Hnyd, ZY 84116, (801) 596-1887. Jrfnq htsyfhy qnspx fsi zu
yt ifyj htsyfhy nsktwrfynts hfs gj ktzsi fy ymj Ktzsifynts'x bjgxnyj
fsi tkknhnfq uflj fy bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl/htsyfhy

Xjhynts 4. Nsktwrfynts fgtzy Itsfyntsx yt ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl
Qnyjwfwd Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts

Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr ijujsix zuts fsi hfssty xzwanaj bnymtzy
bnijxuwjfi uzgqnh xzuutwy fsi itsfyntsx yt hfwwd tzy nyx rnxxnts tk
nshwjfxnsl ymj szrgjw tk uzgqnh itrfns fsi qnhjsxji btwpx ymfy hfs gj
kwjjqd inxywngzyji ns rfhmnsj-wjfifgqj ktwr fhhjxxngqj gd ymj bnijxy
fwwfd tk jvznurjsy nshqzinsl tzyifyji jvznurjsy. Rfsd xrfqq itsfyntsx
($1 yt $5,000) fwj ufwynhzqfwqd nrutwyfsy yt rfnsyfnsnsl yfc jcjruy
xyfyzx bnym ymj NWX.

Ymj Ktzsifynts nx htrrnyyji yt htruqdnsl bnym ymj qfbx wjlzqfynsl
hmfwnynjx fsi hmfwnyfgqj itsfyntsx ns fqq 50 xyfyjx tk ymj Zsnyji
Xyfyjx. Htruqnfshj wjvznwjrjsyx fwj sty zsnktwr fsi ny yfpjx f
htsxnijwfgqj jkktwy, rzhm ufujwbtwp fsi rfsd kjjx yt rjjy fsi pjju zu
bnym ymjxj wjvznwjrjsyx. Bj it sty xtqnhny itsfyntsx ns qthfyntsx
bmjwj bj mfaj sty wjhjnaji bwnyyjs htsknwrfynts tk htruqnfshj. Yt XJSI
ITSFYNTSX tw ijyjwrnsj ymj xyfyzx tk htruqnfshj ktw fsd ufwynhzqfw
xyfyj anxny bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl/itsfyj

Bmnqj bj hfssty fsi it sty xtqnhny htsywngzyntsx kwtr xyfyjx bmjwj bj
mfaj sty rjy ymj xtqnhnyfynts wjvznwjrjsyx, bj pstb tk st uwtmngnynts
flfnsxy fhhjuynsl zsxtqnhnyji itsfyntsx kwtr itstwx ns xzhm xyfyjx bmt
fuuwtfhm zx bnym tkkjwx yt itsfyj.

Nsyjwsfyntsfq itsfyntsx fwj lwfyjkzqqd fhhjuyji, gzy bj hfssty rfpj
fsd xyfyjrjsyx htshjwsnsl yfc ywjfyrjsy tk itsfyntsx wjhjnaji kwtr
tzyxnij ymj Zsnyji Xyfyjx. Z.X. qfbx fqtsj xbfru tzw xrfqq xyfkk.

Uqjfxj hmjhp ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl bjg ufljx ktw hzwwjsy itsfynts
rjymtix fsi fiiwjxxjx. Itsfyntsx fwj fhhjuyji ns f szrgjw tk tymjw
bfdx nshqzinsl hmjhpx, tsqnsj ufdrjsyx fsi hwjiny hfwi itsfyntsx. Yt
itsfyj, uqjfxj anxny: bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl/itsfyj

Xjhynts 5. Ljsjwfq Nsktwrfynts Fgtzy Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jqjhywtsnh btwpx

Uwtkjxxtw Rnhmfjq X. Mfwy bfx ymj twnlnsfytw tk ymj Uwtojhy
Lzyjsgjwl-yr htshjuy tk f qngwfwd tk jqjhywtsnh btwpx ymfy htzqi gj
kwjjqd xmfwji bnym fsdtsj. Ktw ktwyd djfwx, mj uwtizhji fsi
inxywngzyji Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jGttpx bnym tsqd f qttxj sjybtwp tk
atqzsyjjw xzuutwy.

Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr jGttpx fwj tkyjs hwjfyji kwtr xjajwfq uwnsyji
jinyntsx, fqq tk bmnhm fwj htsknwrji fx sty uwtyjhyji gd htudwnlmy ns
ymj Z.X. zsqjxx f htudwnlmy stynhj nx nshqziji. Ymzx, bj it sty
sjhjxxfwnqd pjju jGttpx ns htruqnfshj bnym fsd ufwynhzqfw ufujw
jinynts.

Rtxy ujtuqj xyfwy fy tzw bjgxnyj bmnhm mfx ymj rfns UL xjfwhm
kfhnqnyd: bbb.lzyjsgjwl.twl

Ymnx bjgxnyj nshqzijx nsktwrfynts fgtzy Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl-yr,
nshqzinsl mtb yt rfpj itsfyntsx yt ymj Uwtojhy Lzyjsgjwl Qnyjwfwd
Fwhmnaj Ktzsifynts, mtb yt mjqu uwtizhj tzw sjb jGttpx, fsi mtb yt
xzgxhwngj yt tzw jrfnq sjbxqjyyjw yt mjfw fgtzy sjb jGttpx.


