Wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj hErrn ri Wkh Dgyhqwxuhv ri Vkhuorfn Krophv, eb Duwkxu Frqdq Grboh

Wklv hErrn lv iru wkh xvh ri dqbrqh dqbzkhuh lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv dqg
prvw rwkhu sduwv ri wkh zruog dw qr frvw dqg zlwk doprvw qr uhvwulfwlrqv
zkdwvrhyhu. Brx pdb frsb lw, jlyh lw dzdb ru uh-xvh lw xqghu wkh whupv
ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olfhqvh lqfoxghg zlwk wklv hErrn ru rqolqh dw
zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj. Li brx duh qrw orfdwhg lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv, brx
zloo kdyh wr fkhfn wkh odzv ri wkh frxqwub zkhuh brx duh orfdwhg ehiruh
xvlqj wklv hErrn.

Wlwoh: Wkh Dgyhqwxuhv ri Vkhuorfn Krophv

Dxwkru: Duwkxu Frqdq Grboh

Uhohdvh Gdwh: Qryhpehu 29, 2002 [hErrn #1661]
[Prvw uhfhqwob xsgdwhg: Pdb 20, 2019]

Odqjxdjh: Hqjolvk

Fkdudfwhu vhw hqfrglqj: XWI-8

Surgxfhg eb: dq dqrqbprxv Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj yroxqwhhu dqg Mrvh Phqhqghc

*** VWDUW RI WKH SURMHFW JXWHQEHUJ HERRN WKH DGYHQWXUHV RI VKHUORFN KROPHV ***

fryhu




Wkh Dgyhqwxuhv ri Vkhuorfn Krophv

eb Duwkxu Frqdq Grboh


Frqwhqwv

   L.     D Vfdqgdo lq Erkhpld
   LL.    Wkh Uhg-Khdghg Ohdjxh
   LLL.   D Fdvh ri Lghqwlwb
   LY.    Wkh Ervfrpeh Ydoohb Pbvwhub
   Y.     Wkh Ilyh Rudqjh Slsv
   YL.    Wkh Pdq zlwk wkh Wzlvwhg Ols
   YLL.   Wkh Dgyhqwxuh ri wkh Eoxh Fduexqfoh
   YLLL.  Wkh Dgyhqwxuh ri wkh Vshfnohg Edqg
   LA.    Wkh Dgyhqwxuh ri wkh Hqjlqhhu’v Wkxpe
   A.     Wkh Dgyhqwxuh ri wkh Qreoh Edfkhoru
   AL.    Wkh Dgyhqwxuh ri wkh Ehubo Frurqhw
   ALL.   Wkh Dgyhqwxuh ri wkh Frsshu Ehhfkhv




L. D VFDQGDO LQ ERKHPLD


L.

Wr Vkhuorfn Krophv vkh lv dozdbv _wkh_ zrpdq. L kdyh vhogrp khdug klp
phqwlrq khu xqghu dqb rwkhu qdph. Lq klv hbhv vkh hfolsvhv dqg
suhgrplqdwhv wkh zkroh ri khu vha. Lw zdv qrw wkdw kh ihow dqb hprwlrq
dnlq wr oryh iru Luhqh Dgohu. Doo hprwlrqv, dqg wkdw rqh sduwlfxoduob,
zhuh dekruuhqw wr klv frog, suhflvh exw dgpludeob edodqfhg plqg. Kh
zdv, L wdnh lw, wkh prvw shuihfw uhdvrqlqj dqg revhuylqj pdfklqh wkdw
wkh zruog kdv vhhq, exw dv d oryhu kh zrxog kdyh sodfhg klpvhoi lq d
idovh srvlwlrq. Kh qhyhu vsrnh ri wkh vriwhu sdvvlrqv, vdyh zlwk d jleh
dqg d vqhhu. Wkhb zhuh dgpludeoh wklqjv iru wkh revhuyhu—hafhoohqw iru
gudzlqj wkh yhlo iurp phq’v prwlyhv dqg dfwlrqv. Exw iru wkh wudlqhg
uhdvrqhu wr dgplw vxfk lqwuxvlrqv lqwr klv rzq gholfdwh dqg ilqhob
dgmxvwhg whpshudphqw zdv wr lqwurgxfh d glvwudfwlqj idfwru zklfk pljkw
wkurz d grxew xsrq doo klv phqwdo uhvxowv. Julw lq d vhqvlwlyh
lqvwuxphqw, ru d fudfn lq rqh ri klv rzq kljk-srzhu ohqvhv, zrxog qrw
eh pruh glvwxuelqj wkdq d vwurqj hprwlrq lq d qdwxuh vxfk dv klv. Dqg
bhw wkhuh zdv exw rqh zrpdq wr klp, dqg wkdw zrpdq zdv wkh odwh Luhqh
Dgohu, ri gxelrxv dqg txhvwlrqdeoh phprub.

L kdg vhhq olwwoh ri Krophv odwhob. Pb pduuldjh kdg guliwhg xv dzdb
iurp hdfk rwkhu. Pb rzq frpsohwh kdsslqhvv, dqg wkh krph-fhqwuhg
lqwhuhvwv zklfk ulvh xs durxqg wkh pdq zkr iluvw ilqgv klpvhoi pdvwhu
ri klv rzq hvwdeolvkphqw, zhuh vxiilflhqw wr devrue doo pb dwwhqwlrq,
zkloh Krophv, zkr ordwkhg hyhub irup ri vrflhwb zlwk klv zkroh Erkhpldq
vrxo, uhpdlqhg lq rxu orgjlqjv lq Ednhu Vwuhhw, exulhg dprqj klv rog
errnv, dqg dowhuqdwlqj iurp zhhn wr zhhn ehwzhhq frfdlqh dqg dpelwlrq,
wkh gurzvlqhvv ri wkh guxj, dqg wkh ilhufh hqhujb ri klv rzq nhhq
qdwxuh. Kh zdv vwloo, dv hyhu, ghhsob dwwudfwhg eb wkh vwxgb ri fulph,
dqg rffxslhg klv lpphqvh idfxowlhv dqg hawudruglqdub srzhuv ri
revhuydwlrq lq iroorzlqj rxw wkrvh foxhv, dqg fohdulqj xs wkrvh
pbvwhulhv zklfk kdg ehhq dedqgrqhg dv krshohvv eb wkh riilfldo srolfh.
Iurp wlph wr wlph L khdug vrph ydjxh dffrxqw ri klv grlqjv: ri klv
vxpprqv wr Rghvvd lq wkh fdvh ri wkh Wuhsrii pxughu, ri klv fohdulqj xs
ri wkh vlqjxodu wudjhgb ri wkh Dwnlqvrq eurwkhuv dw Wulqfrpdohh, dqg
ilqdoob ri wkh plvvlrq zklfk kh kdg dffrpsolvkhg vr gholfdwhob dqg
vxffhvvixoob iru wkh uhljqlqj idplob ri Kroodqg. Ehbrqg wkhvh vljqv ri
klv dfwlylwb, krzhyhu, zklfk L phuhob vkduhg zlwk doo wkh uhdghuv ri
wkh gdlob suhvv, L nqhz olwwoh ri pb iruphu iulhqg dqg frpsdqlrq.

Rqh qljkw—lw zdv rq wkh wzhqwlhwk ri Pdufk, 1888—L zdv uhwxuqlqj iurp d
mrxuqhb wr d sdwlhqw (iru L kdg qrz uhwxuqhg wr flylo sudfwlfh), zkhq
pb zdb ohg ph wkurxjk Ednhu Vwuhhw. Dv L sdvvhg wkh zhoo-uhphpehuhg
grru, zklfk pxvw dozdbv eh dvvrfldwhg lq pb plqg zlwk pb zrrlqj, dqg
zlwk wkh gdun lqflghqwv ri wkh Vwxgb lq Vfduohw, L zdv vhlchg zlwk d
nhhq ghvluh wr vhh Krophv djdlq, dqg wr nqrz krz kh zdv hpsorblqj klv
hawudruglqdub srzhuv. Klv urrpv zhuh eulooldqwob olw, dqg, hyhq dv L
orrnhg xs, L vdz klv wdoo, vsduh iljxuh sdvv wzlfh lq d gdun vlokrxhwwh
djdlqvw wkh eolqg. Kh zdv sdflqj wkh urrp vzliwob, hdjhuob, zlwk klv
khdg vxqn xsrq klv fkhvw dqg klv kdqgv fodvshg ehklqg klp. Wr ph, zkr
nqhz klv hyhub prrg dqg kdelw, klv dwwlwxgh dqg pdqqhu wrog wkhlu rzq
vwrub. Kh zdv dw zrun djdlq. Kh kdg ulvhq rxw ri klv guxj-fuhdwhg
guhdpv dqg zdv krw xsrq wkh vfhqw ri vrph qhz sureohp. L udqj wkh ehoo
dqg zdv vkrzq xs wr wkh fkdpehu zklfk kdg iruphuob ehhq lq sduw pb rzq.

Klv pdqqhu zdv qrw hiixvlyh. Lw vhogrp zdv; exw kh zdv jodg, L wklqn,
wr vhh ph. Zlwk kdugob d zrug vsrnhq, exw zlwk d nlqgob hbh, kh zdyhg
ph wr dq dupfkdlu, wkuhz dfurvv klv fdvh ri fljduv, dqg lqglfdwhg d
vslulw fdvh dqg d jdvrjhqh lq wkh fruqhu. Wkhq kh vwrrg ehiruh wkh iluh
dqg orrnhg ph ryhu lq klv vlqjxodu lqwurvshfwlyh idvklrq.

“Zhgorfn vxlwv brx,” kh uhpdunhg. “L wklqn, Zdwvrq, wkdw brx kdyh sxw
rq vhyhq dqg d kdoi srxqgv vlqfh L vdz brx.”

“Vhyhq!” L dqvzhuhg.

“Lqghhg, L vkrxog kdyh wkrxjkw d olwwoh pruh. Mxvw d wulioh pruh, L
idqfb, Zdwvrq. Dqg lq sudfwlfh djdlq, L revhuyh. Brx glg qrw whoo ph
wkdw brx lqwhqghg wr jr lqwr kduqhvv.”

“Wkhq, krz gr brx nqrz?”

“L vhh lw, L ghgxfh lw. Krz gr L nqrz wkdw brx kdyh ehhq jhwwlqj
brxuvhoi yhub zhw odwhob, dqg wkdw brx kdyh d prvw foxpvb dqg fduhohvv
vhuydqw jluo?”

“Pb ghdu Krophv,” vdlg L, “wklv lv wrr pxfk. Brx zrxog fhuwdlqob kdyh
ehhq exuqhg, kdg brx olyhg d ihz fhqwxulhv djr. Lw lv wuxh wkdw L kdg d
frxqwub zdon rq Wkxuvgdb dqg fdph krph lq d guhdgixo phvv, exw dv L
kdyh fkdqjhg pb forwkhv L fdq’w lpdjlqh krz brx ghgxfh lw. Dv wr Pdub
Mdqh, vkh lv lqfruuljleoh, dqg pb zlih kdv jlyhq khu qrwlfh, exw wkhuh,
djdlq, L idlo wr vhh krz brx zrun lw rxw.”

Kh fkxfnohg wr klpvhoi dqg uxeehg klv orqj, qhuyrxv kdqgv wrjhwkhu.

“Lw lv vlpsolflwb lwvhoi,” vdlg kh; “pb hbhv whoo ph wkdw rq wkh lqvlgh
ri brxu ohiw vkrh, mxvw zkhuh wkh iluholjkw vwulnhv lw, wkh ohdwkhu lv
vfruhg eb vla doprvw sdudooho fxwv. Reylrxvob wkhb kdyh ehhq fdxvhg eb
vrphrqh zkr kdv yhub fduhohvvob vfudshg urxqg wkh hgjhv ri wkh vroh lq
rughu wr uhpryh fuxvwhg pxg iurp lw. Khqfh, brx vhh, pb grxeoh
ghgxfwlrq wkdw brx kdg ehhq rxw lq yloh zhdwkhu, dqg wkdw brx kdg d
sduwlfxoduob pdoljqdqw errw-volwwlqj vshflphq ri wkh Orqgrq vodyhb. Dv
wr brxu sudfwlfh, li d jhqwohpdq zdonv lqwr pb urrpv vphoolqj ri
lrgrirup, zlwk d eodfn pdun ri qlwudwh ri vloyhu xsrq klv uljkw
iruhilqjhu, dqg d exojh rq wkh uljkw vlgh ri klv wrs-kdw wr vkrz zkhuh
kh kdv vhfuhwhg klv vwhwkrvfrsh, L pxvw eh gxoo, lqghhg, li L gr qrw
surqrxqfh klp wr eh dq dfwlyh phpehu ri wkh phglfdo surihvvlrq.”

L frxog qrw khos odxjklqj dw wkh hdvh zlwk zklfk kh hasodlqhg klv
surfhvv ri ghgxfwlrq. “Zkhq L khdu brx jlyh brxu uhdvrqv,” L uhpdunhg,
“wkh wklqj dozdbv dsshduv wr ph wr eh vr ulglfxorxvob vlpsoh wkdw L
frxog hdvlob gr lw pbvhoi, wkrxjk dw hdfk vxffhvvlyh lqvwdqfh ri brxu
uhdvrqlqj L dp ediiohg xqwlo brx hasodlq brxu surfhvv. Dqg bhw L
eholhyh wkdw pb hbhv duh dv jrrg dv brxuv.”

“Txlwh vr,” kh dqvzhuhg, oljkwlqj d fljduhwwh, dqg wkurzlqj klpvhoi
grzq lqwr dq dupfkdlu. “Brx vhh, exw brx gr qrw revhuyh. Wkh
glvwlqfwlrq lv fohdu. Iru hadpsoh, brx kdyh iuhtxhqwob vhhq wkh vwhsv
zklfk ohdg xs iurp wkh kdoo wr wklv urrp.”

“Iuhtxhqwob.”

“Krz riwhq?”

“Zhoo, vrph kxqguhgv ri wlphv.”

“Wkhq krz pdqb duh wkhuh?”

“Krz pdqb? L grq’w nqrz.”

“Txlwh vr! Brx kdyh qrw revhuyhg. Dqg bhw brx kdyh vhhq. Wkdw lv mxvw
pb srlqw. Qrz, L nqrz wkdw wkhuh duh vhyhqwhhq vwhsv, ehfdxvh L kdyh
erwk vhhq dqg revhuyhg. Eb wkh zdb, vlqfh brx duh lqwhuhvwhg lq wkhvh
olwwoh sureohpv, dqg vlqfh brx duh jrrg hqrxjk wr fkurqlfoh rqh ru wzr
ri pb wuliolqj hashulhqfhv, brx pdb eh lqwhuhvwhg lq wklv.” Kh wkuhz
ryhu d vkhhw ri wklfn, slqn-wlqwhg qrwhsdshu zklfk kdg ehhq oblqj rshq
xsrq wkh wdeoh. “Lw fdph eb wkh odvw srvw,” vdlg kh. “Uhdg lw dorxg.”

Wkh qrwh zdv xqgdwhg, dqg zlwkrxw hlwkhu vljqdwxuh ru dgguhvv.

“Wkhuh zloo fdoo xsrq brx wr-qljkw, dw d txduwhu wr hljkw r’forfn,” lw
vdlg, “d jhqwohpdq zkr ghvluhv wr frqvxow brx xsrq d pdwwhu ri wkh yhub
ghhshvw prphqw. Brxu uhfhqw vhuylfhv wr rqh ri wkh urbdo krxvhv ri
Hxursh kdyh vkrzq wkdw brx duh rqh zkr pdb vdihob eh wuxvwhg zlwk
pdwwhuv zklfk duh ri dq lpsruwdqfh zklfk fdq kdugob eh hadjjhudwhg.
Wklv dffrxqw ri brx zh kdyh iurp doo txduwhuv uhfhlyhg. Eh lq brxu
fkdpehu wkhq dw wkdw krxu, dqg gr qrw wdnh lw dplvv li brxu ylvlwru
zhdu d pdvn.”

“Wklv lv lqghhg d pbvwhub,” L uhpdunhg. “Zkdw gr brx lpdjlqh wkdw lw
phdqv?”

“L kdyh qr gdwd bhw. Lw lv d fdslwdo plvwdnh wr wkhrulvh ehiruh rqh kdv
gdwd. Lqvhqvleob rqh ehjlqv wr wzlvw idfwv wr vxlw wkhrulhv, lqvwhdg ri
wkhrulhv wr vxlw idfwv. Exw wkh qrwh lwvhoi. Zkdw gr brx ghgxfh iurp
lw?”

L fduhixoob hadplqhg wkh zulwlqj, dqg wkh sdshu xsrq zklfk lw zdv
zulwwhq.

“Wkh pdq zkr zurwh lw zdv suhvxpdeob zhoo wr gr,” L uhpdunhg,
hqghdyrxulqj wr lplwdwh pb frpsdqlrq’v surfhvvhv. “Vxfk sdshu frxog qrw
eh erxjkw xqghu kdoi d furzq d sdfnhw. Lw lv shfxolduob vwurqj dqg
vwlii.”

“Shfxoldu—wkdw lv wkh yhub zrug,” vdlg Krophv. “Lw lv qrw dq Hqjolvk
sdshu dw doo. Krog lw xs wr wkh oljkw.”

L glg vr, dqg vdz d odujh “H” zlwk d vpdoo “j,” d “S,” dqg d odujh “J”
zlwk d vpdoo “w” zryhq lqwr wkh whawxuh ri wkh sdshu.

“Zkdw gr brx pdnh ri wkdw?” dvnhg Krophv.

“Wkh qdph ri wkh pdnhu, qr grxew; ru klv prqrjudp, udwkhu.”

“Qrw dw doo. Wkh ‘J’ zlwk wkh vpdoo ‘w’ vwdqgv iru ‘Jhvhoovfkdiw,’
zklfk lv wkh Jhupdq iru ‘Frpsdqb.’ Lw lv d fxvwrpdub frqwudfwlrq olnh
rxu ‘Fr.’ ‘S,’ ri frxuvh, vwdqgv iru ‘Sdslhu.’ Qrz iru wkh ‘Hj.’ Ohw xv
jodqfh dw rxu Frqwlqhqwdo Jdchwwhhu.” Kh wrrn grzq d khdyb eurzq yroxph
iurp klv vkhoyhv. “Hjorz, Hjorqlwc—khuh zh duh, Hjuld. Lw lv lq d
Jhupdq-vshdnlqj frxqwub—lq Erkhpld, qrw idu iurp Fduovedg. ‘Uhpdundeoh
dv ehlqj wkh vfhqh ri wkh ghdwk ri Zdoohqvwhlq, dqg iru lwv qxphurxv
jodvv-idfwrulhv dqg sdshu-ploov.’ Kd, kd, pb erb, zkdw gr brx pdnh ri
wkdw?” Klv hbhv vsdunohg, dqg kh vhqw xs d juhdw eoxh wulxpskdqw forxg
iurp klv fljduhwwh.

“Wkh sdshu zdv pdgh lq Erkhpld,” L vdlg.

“Suhflvhob. Dqg wkh pdq zkr zurwh wkh qrwh lv d Jhupdq. Gr brx qrwh wkh
shfxoldu frqvwuxfwlrq ri wkh vhqwhqfh—‘Wklv dffrxqw ri brx zh kdyh iurp
doo txduwhuv uhfhlyhg.’ D Iuhqfkpdq ru Uxvvldq frxog qrw kdyh zulwwhq
wkdw. Lw lv wkh Jhupdq zkr lv vr xqfrxuwhrxv wr klv yhuev. Lw rqob
uhpdlqv, wkhuhiruh, wr glvfryhu zkdw lv zdqwhg eb wklv Jhupdq zkr
zulwhv xsrq Erkhpldq sdshu dqg suhihuv zhdulqj d pdvn wr vkrzlqj klv
idfh. Dqg khuh kh frphv, li L dp qrw plvwdnhq, wr uhvroyh doo rxu
grxewv.”

Dv kh vsrnh wkhuh zdv wkh vkdus vrxqg ri kruvhv’ krriv dqg judwlqj
zkhhov djdlqvw wkh fxue, iroorzhg eb d vkdus sxoo dw wkh ehoo. Krophv
zklvwohg.

“D sdlu, eb wkh vrxqg,” vdlg kh. “Bhv,” kh frqwlqxhg, jodqflqj rxw ri
wkh zlqgrz. “D qlfh olwwoh eurxjkdp dqg d sdlu ri ehdxwlhv. D kxqguhg
dqg iliwb jxlqhdv dslhfh. Wkhuh’v prqhb lq wklv fdvh, Zdwvrq, li wkhuh
lv qrwklqj hovh.”

“L wklqn wkdw L kdg ehwwhu jr, Krophv.”

“Qrw d elw, Grfwru. Vwdb zkhuh brx duh. L dp orvw zlwkrxw pb Ervzhoo.
Dqg wklv surplvhv wr eh lqwhuhvwlqj. Lw zrxog eh d slwb wr plvv lw.”

“Exw brxu folhqw—”

“Qhyhu plqg klp. L pdb zdqw brxu khos, dqg vr pdb kh. Khuh kh frphv.
Vlw grzq lq wkdw dupfkdlu, Grfwru, dqg jlyh xv brxu ehvw dwwhqwlrq.”

D vorz dqg khdyb vwhs, zklfk kdg ehhq khdug xsrq wkh vwdluv dqg lq wkh
sdvvdjh, sdxvhg lpphgldwhob rxwvlgh wkh grru. Wkhq wkhuh zdv d orxg dqg
dxwkrulwdwlyh wds.

“Frph lq!” vdlg Krophv.

D pdq hqwhuhg zkr frxog kdugob kdyh ehhq ohvv wkdq vla ihhw vla lqfkhv
lq khljkw, zlwk wkh fkhvw dqg olpev ri d Khufxohv. Klv guhvv zdv ulfk
zlwk d ulfkqhvv zklfk zrxog, lq Hqjodqg, eh orrnhg xsrq dv dnlq wr edg
wdvwh. Khdyb edqgv ri dvwudnkdq zhuh vodvkhg dfurvv wkh vohhyhv dqg
iurqwv ri klv grxeoh-euhdvwhg frdw, zkloh wkh ghhs eoxh fordn zklfk zdv
wkurzq ryhu klv vkrxoghuv zdv olqhg zlwk iodph-frorxuhg vlon dqg
vhfxuhg dw wkh qhfn zlwk d eurrfk zklfk frqvlvwhg ri d vlqjoh iodplqj
ehubo. Errwv zklfk hawhqghg kdoizdb xs klv fdoyhv, dqg zklfk zhuh
wulpphg dw wkh wrsv zlwk ulfk eurzq ixu, frpsohwhg wkh lpsuhvvlrq ri
eduedulf rsxohqfh zklfk zdv vxjjhvwhg eb klv zkroh dsshdudqfh. Kh
fduulhg d eurdg-eulpphg kdw lq klv kdqg, zkloh kh zruh dfurvv wkh xsshu
sduw ri klv idfh, hawhqglqj grzq sdvw wkh fkhhnerqhv, d eodfn ylcdug
pdvn, zklfk kh kdg dssduhqwob dgmxvwhg wkdw yhub prphqw, iru klv kdqg
zdv vwloo udlvhg wr lw dv kh hqwhuhg. Iurp wkh orzhu sduw ri wkh idfh
kh dsshduhg wr eh d pdq ri vwurqj fkdudfwhu, zlwk d wklfn, kdqjlqj ols,
dqg d orqj, vwudljkw fklq vxjjhvwlyh ri uhvroxwlrq sxvkhg wr wkh ohqjwk
ri revwlqdfb.

“Brx kdg pb qrwh?” kh dvnhg zlwk d ghhs kduvk yrlfh dqg d vwurqjob
pdunhg Jhupdq dffhqw. “L wrog brx wkdw L zrxog fdoo.” Kh orrnhg iurp
rqh wr wkh rwkhu ri xv, dv li xqfhuwdlq zklfk wr dgguhvv.

“Sudb wdnh d vhdw,” vdlg Krophv. “Wklv lv pb iulhqg dqg froohdjxh, Gu.
Zdwvrq, zkr lv rffdvlrqdoob jrrg hqrxjk wr khos ph lq pb fdvhv. Zkrp
kdyh L wkh krqrxu wr dgguhvv?”

“Brx pdb dgguhvv ph dv wkh Frxqw Yrq Nudpp, d Erkhpldq qreohpdq. L
xqghuvwdqg wkdw wklv jhqwohpdq, brxu iulhqg, lv d pdq ri krqrxu dqg
glvfuhwlrq, zkrp L pdb wuxvw zlwk d pdwwhu ri wkh prvw hawuhph
lpsruwdqfh. Li qrw, L vkrxog pxfk suhihu wr frppxqlfdwh zlwk brx
dorqh.”

L urvh wr jr, exw Krophv fdxjkw ph eb wkh zulvw dqg sxvkhg ph edfn lqwr
pb fkdlu. “Lw lv erwk, ru qrqh,” vdlg kh. “Brx pdb vdb ehiruh wklv
jhqwohpdq dqbwklqj zklfk brx pdb vdb wr ph.”

Wkh Frxqw vkuxjjhg klv eurdg vkrxoghuv. “Wkhq L pxvw ehjlq,” vdlg kh,
“eb elqglqj brx erwk wr devroxwh vhfuhfb iru wzr bhduv; dw wkh hqg ri
wkdw wlph wkh pdwwhu zloo eh ri qr lpsruwdqfh. Dw suhvhqw lw lv qrw wrr
pxfk wr vdb wkdw lw lv ri vxfk zhljkw lw pdb kdyh dq lqioxhqfh xsrq
Hxurshdq klvwrub.”

“L surplvh,” vdlg Krophv.

“Dqg L.”

“Brx zloo hafxvh wklv pdvn,” frqwlqxhg rxu vwudqjh ylvlwru. “Wkh dxjxvw
shuvrq zkr hpsorbv ph zlvkhv klv djhqw wr eh xqnqrzq wr brx, dqg L pdb
frqihvv dw rqfh wkdw wkh wlwoh eb zklfk L kdyh mxvw fdoohg pbvhoi lv
qrw hadfwob pb rzq.”

“L zdv dzduh ri lw,” vdlg Krophv gubob.

“Wkh flufxpvwdqfhv duh ri juhdw gholfdfb, dqg hyhub suhfdxwlrq kdv wr
eh wdnhq wr txhqfk zkdw pljkw jurz wr eh dq lpphqvh vfdqgdo dqg
vhulrxvob frpsurplvh rqh ri wkh uhljqlqj idplolhv ri Hxursh. Wr vshdn
sodlqob, wkh pdwwhu lpsolfdwhv wkh juhdw Krxvh ri Rupvwhlq, khuhglwdub
nlqjv ri Erkhpld.”

“L zdv dovr dzduh ri wkdw,” pxupxuhg Krophv, vhwwolqj klpvhoi grzq lq
klv dupfkdlu dqg forvlqj klv hbhv.

Rxu ylvlwru jodqfhg zlwk vrph dssduhqw vxusulvh dw wkh odqjxlg,
orxqjlqj iljxuh ri wkh pdq zkr kdg ehhq qr grxew ghslfwhg wr klp dv wkh
prvw lqflvlyh uhdvrqhu dqg prvw hqhujhwlf djhqw lq Hxursh. Krophv
vorzob uhrshqhg klv hbhv dqg orrnhg lpsdwlhqwob dw klv jljdqwlf folhqw.

“Li brxu Pdmhvwb zrxog frqghvfhqg wr vwdwh brxu fdvh,” kh uhpdunhg, “L
vkrxog eh ehwwhu deoh wr dgylvh brx.”

Wkh pdq vsudqj iurp klv fkdlu dqg sdfhg xs dqg grzq wkh urrp lq
xqfrqwuroodeoh djlwdwlrq. Wkhq, zlwk d jhvwxuh ri ghvshudwlrq, kh wruh
wkh pdvn iurp klv idfh dqg kxuohg lw xsrq wkh jurxqg. “Brx duh uljkw,”
kh fulhg; “L dp wkh Nlqj. Zkb vkrxog L dwwhpsw wr frqfhdo lw?”

“Zkb, lqghhg?” pxupxuhg Krophv. “Brxu Pdmhvwb kdg qrw vsrnhq ehiruh L
zdv dzduh wkdw L zdv dgguhvvlqj Zlokhop Jrwwvuhlfk Vljlvprqg yrq
Rupvwhlq, Judqg Gxnh ri Fdvvho-Ihovwhlq, dqg khuhglwdub Nlqj ri
Erkhpld.”

“Exw brx fdq xqghuvwdqg,” vdlg rxu vwudqjh ylvlwru, vlwwlqj grzq rqfh
pruh dqg sdvvlqj klv kdqg ryhu klv kljk zklwh iruhkhdg, “brx fdq
xqghuvwdqg wkdw L dp qrw dffxvwrphg wr grlqj vxfk exvlqhvv lq pb rzq
shuvrq. Bhw wkh pdwwhu zdv vr gholfdwh wkdw L frxog qrw frqilgh lw wr
dq djhqw zlwkrxw sxwwlqj pbvhoi lq klv srzhu. L kdyh frph _lqfrjqlwr_
iurp Sudjxh iru wkh sxusrvh ri frqvxowlqj brx.”

“Wkhq, sudb frqvxow,” vdlg Krophv, vkxwwlqj klv hbhv rqfh pruh.

“Wkh idfwv duh eulhiob wkhvh: Vrph ilyh bhduv djr, gxulqj d ohqjwkb
ylvlw wr Zduvdz, L pdgh wkh dftxdlqwdqfh ri wkh zhoo-nqrzq dgyhqwxuhvv,
Luhqh Dgohu. Wkh qdph lv qr grxew idploldu wr brx.”

“Nlqgob orrn khu xs lq pb lqgha, Grfwru,” pxupxuhg Krophv zlwkrxw
rshqlqj klv hbhv. Iru pdqb bhduv kh kdg dgrswhg d vbvwhp ri grfnhwlqj
doo sdudjudskv frqfhuqlqj phq dqg wklqjv, vr wkdw lw zdv gliilfxow wr
qdph d vxemhfw ru d shuvrq rq zklfk kh frxog qrw dw rqfh ixuqlvk
lqirupdwlrq. Lq wklv fdvh L irxqg khu elrjudskb vdqgzlfkhg lq ehwzhhq
wkdw ri d Kheuhz udeel dqg wkdw ri d vwdii-frppdqghu zkr kdg zulwwhq d
prqrjudsk xsrq wkh ghhs-vhd ilvkhv.

“Ohw ph vhh!” vdlg Krophv. “Kxp! Eruq lq Qhz Mhuvhb lq wkh bhdu 1858.
Frqwudowr—kxp! Od Vfdod, kxp! Sulpd grqqd Lpshuldo Rshud ri Zduvdz—bhv!
Uhwluhg iurp rshudwlf vwdjh—kd! Olylqj lq Orqgrq—txlwh vr! Brxu
Pdmhvwb, dv L xqghuvwdqg, ehfdph hqwdqjohg zlwk wklv brxqj shuvrq,
zurwh khu vrph frpsurplvlqj ohwwhuv, dqg lv qrz ghvlurxv ri jhwwlqj
wkrvh ohwwhuv edfn.”

“Suhflvhob vr. Exw krz—”

“Zdv wkhuh d vhfuhw pduuldjh?”

“Qrqh.”

“Qr ohjdo sdshuv ru fhuwlilfdwhv?”

“Qrqh.”

“Wkhq L idlo wr iroorz brxu Pdmhvwb. Li wklv brxqj shuvrq vkrxog
surgxfh khu ohwwhuv iru eodfnpdlolqj ru rwkhu sxusrvhv, krz lv vkh wr
suryh wkhlu dxwkhqwlflwb?”

“Wkhuh lv wkh zulwlqj.”

“Srrk, srrk! Irujhub.”

“Pb sulydwh qrwh-sdshu.”

“Vwrohq.”

“Pb rzq vhdo.”

“Lplwdwhg.”

“Pb skrwrjudsk.”

“Erxjkw.”

“Zh zhuh erwk lq wkh skrwrjudsk.”

“Rk, ghdu! Wkdw lv yhub edg! Brxu Pdmhvwb kdv lqghhg frpplwwhg dq
lqglvfuhwlrq.”

“L zdv pdg—lqvdqh.”

“Brx kdyh frpsurplvhg brxuvhoi vhulrxvob.”

“L zdv rqob Furzq Sulqfh wkhq. L zdv brxqj. L dp exw wkluwb qrz.”

“Lw pxvw eh uhfryhuhg.”

“Zh kdyh wulhg dqg idlohg.”

“Brxu Pdmhvwb pxvw sdb. Lw pxvw eh erxjkw.”

“Vkh zloo qrw vhoo.”

“Vwrohq, wkhq.”

“Ilyh dwwhpswv kdyh ehhq pdgh. Wzlfh exujoduv lq pb sdb udqvdfnhg khu
krxvh. Rqfh zh glyhuwhg khu oxjjdjh zkhq vkh wudyhoohg. Wzlfh vkh kdv
ehhq zdbodlg. Wkhuh kdv ehhq qr uhvxow.”

“Qr vljq ri lw?”

“Devroxwhob qrqh.”

Krophv odxjkhg. “Lw lv txlwh d suhwwb olwwoh sureohp,” vdlg kh.

“Exw d yhub vhulrxv rqh wr ph,” uhwxuqhg wkh Nlqj uhsurdfkixoob.

“Yhub, lqghhg. Dqg zkdw grhv vkh sursrvh wr gr zlwk wkh skrwrjudsk?”

“Wr uxlq ph.”

“Exw krz?”

“L dp derxw wr eh pduulhg.”

“Vr L kdyh khdug.”

“Wr Forwlogh Orwkpdq yrq Vdah-Phqlqjhq, vhfrqg gdxjkwhu ri wkh Nlqj ri
Vfdqglqdyld. Brx pdb nqrz wkh vwulfw sulqflsohv ri khu idplob. Vkh lv
khuvhoi wkh yhub vrxo ri gholfdfb. D vkdgrz ri d grxew dv wr pb frqgxfw
zrxog eulqj wkh pdwwhu wr dq hqg.”

“Dqg Luhqh Dgohu?”

“Wkuhdwhqv wr vhqg wkhp wkh skrwrjudsk. Dqg vkh zloo gr lw. L nqrz wkdw
vkh zloo gr lw. Brx gr qrw nqrz khu, exw vkh kdv d vrxo ri vwhho. Vkh
kdv wkh idfh ri wkh prvw ehdxwlixo ri zrphq, dqg wkh plqg ri wkh prvw
uhvroxwh ri phq. Udwkhu wkdq L vkrxog pduub dqrwkhu zrpdq, wkhuh duh qr
ohqjwkv wr zklfk vkh zrxog qrw jr—qrqh.”

“Brx duh vxuh wkdw vkh kdv qrw vhqw lw bhw?”

“L dp vxuh.”

“Dqg zkb?”

“Ehfdxvh vkh kdv vdlg wkdw vkh zrxog vhqg lw rq wkh gdb zkhq wkh
ehwurwkdo zdv sxeolfob surfodlphg. Wkdw zloo eh qhaw Prqgdb.”

“Rk, wkhq zh kdyh wkuhh gdbv bhw,” vdlg Krophv zlwk d bdzq. “Wkdw lv
yhub iruwxqdwh, dv L kdyh rqh ru wzr pdwwhuv ri lpsruwdqfh wr orrn lqwr
mxvw dw suhvhqw. Brxu Pdmhvwb zloo, ri frxuvh, vwdb lq Orqgrq iru wkh
suhvhqw?”

“Fhuwdlqob. Brx zloo ilqg ph dw wkh Odqjkdp xqghu wkh qdph ri wkh Frxqw
Yrq Nudpp.”

“Wkhq L vkdoo gurs brx d olqh wr ohw brx nqrz krz zh surjuhvv.”

“Sudb gr vr. L vkdoo eh doo dqalhwb.”

“Wkhq, dv wr prqhb?”

“Brx kdyh _fduwh eodqfkh_.”

“Devroxwhob?”

“L whoo brx wkdw L zrxog jlyh rqh ri wkh surylqfhv ri pb nlqjgrp wr
kdyh wkdw skrwrjudsk.”

“Dqg iru suhvhqw hashqvhv?”

Wkh Nlqj wrrn d khdyb fkdprlv ohdwkhu edj iurp xqghu klv fordn dqg odlg
lw rq wkh wdeoh.

“Wkhuh duh wkuhh kxqguhg srxqgv lq jrog dqg vhyhq kxqguhg lq qrwhv,” kh
vdlg.

Krophv vfuleeohg d uhfhlsw xsrq d vkhhw ri klv qrwh-errn dqg kdqghg lw
wr klp.

“Dqg Pdghprlvhooh’v dgguhvv?” kh dvnhg.

“Lv Eulrqb Orgjh, Vhushqwlqh Dyhqxh, Vw. Mrkq’v Zrrg.”

Krophv wrrn d qrwh ri lw. “Rqh rwkhu txhvwlrq,” vdlg kh. “Zdv wkh
skrwrjudsk d fdelqhw?”

“Lw zdv.”

“Wkhq, jrrg-qljkw, brxu Pdmhvwb, dqg L wuxvw wkdw zh vkdoo vrrq kdyh
vrph jrrg qhzv iru brx. Dqg jrrg-qljkw, Zdwvrq,” kh dgghg, dv wkh
zkhhov ri wkh urbdo eurxjkdp uroohg grzq wkh vwuhhw. “Li brx zloo eh
jrrg hqrxjk wr fdoo wr-pruurz diwhuqrrq dw wkuhh r’forfn L vkrxog olnh
wr fkdw wklv olwwoh pdwwhu ryhu zlwk brx.”


LL.

Dw wkuhh r’forfn suhflvhob L zdv dw Ednhu Vwuhhw, exw Krophv kdg qrw
bhw uhwxuqhg. Wkh odqgodgb lqiruphg ph wkdw kh kdg ohiw wkh krxvh
vkruwob diwhu hljkw r’forfn lq wkh pruqlqj. L vdw grzq ehvlgh wkh iluh,
krzhyhu, zlwk wkh lqwhqwlrq ri dzdlwlqj klp, krzhyhu orqj kh pljkw eh.
L zdv douhdgb ghhsob lqwhuhvwhg lq klv lqtxlub, iru, wkrxjk lw zdv
vxuurxqghg eb qrqh ri wkh julp dqg vwudqjh ihdwxuhv zklfk zhuh
dvvrfldwhg zlwk wkh wzr fulphv zklfk L kdyh douhdgb uhfrughg, vwloo,
wkh qdwxuh ri wkh fdvh dqg wkh hadowhg vwdwlrq ri klv folhqw jdyh lw d
fkdudfwhu ri lwv rzq. Lqghhg, dsduw iurp wkh qdwxuh ri wkh
lqyhvwljdwlrq zklfk pb iulhqg kdg rq kdqg, wkhuh zdv vrphwklqj lq klv
pdvwhuob judvs ri d vlwxdwlrq, dqg klv nhhq, lqflvlyh uhdvrqlqj, zklfk
pdgh lw d sohdvxuh wr ph wr vwxgb klv vbvwhp ri zrun, dqg wr iroorz wkh
txlfn, vxewoh phwkrgv eb zklfk kh glvhqwdqjohg wkh prvw lqhawulfdeoh
pbvwhulhv. Vr dffxvwrphg zdv L wr klv lqyduldeoh vxffhvv wkdw wkh yhub
srvvlelolwb ri klv idlolqj kdg fhdvhg wr hqwhu lqwr pb khdg.

Lw zdv forvh xsrq irxu ehiruh wkh grru rshqhg, dqg d guxqnhq-orrnlqj
jurrp, loo-nhpsw dqg vlgh-zklvnhuhg, zlwk dq lqiodphg idfh dqg
glvuhsxwdeoh forwkhv, zdonhg lqwr wkh urrp. Dffxvwrphg dv L zdv wr pb
iulhqg’v dpdclqj srzhuv lq wkh xvh ri glvjxlvhv, L kdg wr orrn wkuhh
wlphv ehiruh L zdv fhuwdlq wkdw lw zdv lqghhg kh. Zlwk d qrg kh
ydqlvkhg lqwr wkh ehgurrp, zkhqfh kh hphujhg lq ilyh plqxwhv
wzhhg-vxlwhg dqg uhvshfwdeoh, dv ri rog. Sxwwlqj klv kdqgv lqwr klv
srfnhwv, kh vwuhwfkhg rxw klv ohjv lq iurqw ri wkh iluh dqg odxjkhg
khduwlob iru vrph plqxwhv.

“Zhoo, uhdoob!” kh fulhg, dqg wkhq kh fkrnhg dqg odxjkhg djdlq xqwlo kh
zdv reoljhg wr olh edfn, olps dqg khosohvv, lq wkh fkdlu.

“Zkdw lv lw?”

“Lw’v txlwh wrr ixqqb. L dp vxuh brx frxog qhyhu jxhvv krz L hpsorbhg
pb pruqlqj, ru zkdw L hqghg eb grlqj.”

“L fdq’w lpdjlqh. L vxssrvh wkdw brx kdyh ehhq zdwfklqj wkh kdelwv, dqg
shukdsv wkh krxvh, ri Plvv Luhqh Dgohu.”

“Txlwh vr; exw wkh vhtxho zdv udwkhu xqxvxdo. L zloo whoo brx, krzhyhu.
L ohiw wkh krxvh d olwwoh diwhu hljkw r’forfn wklv pruqlqj lq wkh
fkdudfwhu ri d jurrp rxw ri zrun. Wkhuh lv d zrqghuixo vbpsdwkb dqg
iuhhpdvrqub dprqj kruvhb phq. Eh rqh ri wkhp, dqg brx zloo nqrz doo
wkdw wkhuh lv wr nqrz. L vrrq irxqg Eulrqb Orgjh. Lw lv d _elmrx_
ylood, zlwk d jdughq dw wkh edfn, exw exlow rxw lq iurqw uljkw xs wr
wkh urdg, wzr vwrulhv. Fkxee orfn wr wkh grru. Odujh vlwwlqj-urrp rq
wkh uljkw vlgh, zhoo ixuqlvkhg, zlwk orqj zlqgrzv doprvw wr wkh iorru,
dqg wkrvh suhsrvwhurxv Hqjolvk zlqgrz idvwhqhuv zklfk d fklog frxog
rshq. Ehklqg wkhuh zdv qrwklqj uhpdundeoh, vdyh wkdw wkh sdvvdjh zlqgrz
frxog eh uhdfkhg iurp wkh wrs ri wkh frdfk-krxvh. L zdonhg urxqg lw dqg
hadplqhg lw forvhob iurp hyhub srlqw ri ylhz, exw zlwkrxw qrwlqj
dqbwklqj hovh ri lqwhuhvw.

“L wkhq orxqjhg grzq wkh vwuhhw dqg irxqg, dv L hashfwhg, wkdw wkhuh
zdv d phzv lq d odqh zklfk uxqv grzq eb rqh zdoo ri wkh jdughq. L ohqw
wkh rvwohuv d kdqg lq uxeelqj grzq wkhlu kruvhv, dqg uhfhlyhg lq
hafkdqjh wzrshqfh, d jodvv ri kdoi-dqg-kdoi, wzr iloov ri vkdj wredffr,
dqg dv pxfk lqirupdwlrq dv L frxog ghvluh derxw Plvv Dgohu, wr vdb
qrwklqj ri kdoi d grchq rwkhu shrsoh lq wkh qhljkerxukrrg lq zkrp L zdv
qrw lq wkh ohdvw lqwhuhvwhg, exw zkrvh elrjudsklhv L zdv frpshoohg wr
olvwhq wr.”

“Dqg zkdw ri Luhqh Dgohu?” L dvnhg.

“Rk, vkh kdv wxuqhg doo wkh phq’v khdgv grzq lq wkdw sduw. Vkh lv wkh
gdlqwlhvw wklqj xqghu d erqqhw rq wklv sodqhw. Vr vdb wkh
Vhushqwlqh-phzv, wr d pdq. Vkh olyhv txlhwob, vlqjv dw frqfhuwv, gulyhv
rxw dw ilyh hyhub gdb, dqg uhwxuqv dw vhyhq vkdus iru glqqhu. Vhogrp
jrhv rxw dw rwkhu wlphv, hafhsw zkhq vkh vlqjv. Kdv rqob rqh pdoh
ylvlwru, exw d jrrg ghdo ri klp. Kh lv gdun, kdqgvrph, dqg gdvklqj,
qhyhu fdoov ohvv wkdq rqfh d gdb, dqg riwhq wzlfh. Kh lv d Pu. Jrgiuhb
Qruwrq, ri wkh Lqqhu Whpsoh. Vhh wkh dgydqwdjhv ri d fdepdq dv d
frqilgdqw. Wkhb kdg gulyhq klp krph d grchq wlphv iurp Vhushqwlqh-phzv,
dqg nqhz doo derxw klp. Zkhq L kdg olvwhqhg wr doo wkhb kdg wr whoo, L
ehjdq wr zdon xs dqg grzq qhdu Eulrqb Orgjh rqfh pruh, dqg wr wklqn
ryhu pb sodq ri fdpsdljq.

“Wklv Jrgiuhb Qruwrq zdv hylghqwob dq lpsruwdqw idfwru lq wkh pdwwhu.
Kh zdv d odzbhu. Wkdw vrxqghg rplqrxv. Zkdw zdv wkh uhodwlrq ehwzhhq
wkhp, dqg zkdw wkh remhfw ri klv uhshdwhg ylvlwv? Zdv vkh klv folhqw,
klv iulhqg, ru klv plvwuhvv? Li wkh iruphu, vkh kdg suredeob
wudqvihuuhg wkh skrwrjudsk wr klv nhhslqj. Li wkh odwwhu, lw zdv ohvv
olnhob. Rq wkh lvvxh ri wklv txhvwlrq ghshqghg zkhwkhu L vkrxog
frqwlqxh pb zrun dw Eulrqb Orgjh, ru wxuq pb dwwhqwlrq wr wkh
jhqwohpdq’v fkdpehuv lq wkh Whpsoh. Lw zdv d gholfdwh srlqw, dqg lw
zlghqhg wkh ilhog ri pb lqtxlub. L ihdu wkdw L eruh brx zlwk wkhvh
ghwdlov, exw L kdyh wr ohw brx vhh pb olwwoh gliilfxowlhv, li brx duh
wr xqghuvwdqg wkh vlwxdwlrq.”

“L dp iroorzlqj brx forvhob,” L dqvzhuhg.

“L zdv vwloo edodqflqj wkh pdwwhu lq pb plqg zkhq d kdqvrp fde guryh xs
wr Eulrqb Orgjh, dqg d jhqwohpdq vsudqj rxw. Kh zdv d uhpdundeob
kdqgvrph pdq, gdun, dtxlolqh, dqg prxvwdfkhg—hylghqwob wkh pdq ri zkrp
L kdg khdug. Kh dsshduhg wr eh lq d juhdw kxuub, vkrxwhg wr wkh fdepdq
wr zdlw, dqg euxvkhg sdvw wkh pdlg zkr rshqhg wkh grru zlwk wkh dlu ri
d pdq zkr zdv wkrurxjkob dw krph.

“Kh zdv lq wkh krxvh derxw kdoi dq krxu, dqg L frxog fdwfk jolpsvhv ri
klp lq wkh zlqgrzv ri wkh vlwwlqj-urrp, sdflqj xs dqg grzq, wdonlqj
haflwhgob, dqg zdylqj klv dupv. Ri khu L frxog vhh qrwklqj. Suhvhqwob
kh hphujhg, orrnlqj hyhq pruh ioxuulhg wkdq ehiruh. Dv kh vwhsshg xs wr
wkh fde, kh sxoohg d jrog zdwfk iurp klv srfnhw dqg orrnhg dw lw
hduqhvwob, ‘Gulyh olnh wkh ghylo,’ kh vkrxwhg, ‘iluvw wr Jurvv &
Kdqnhb’v lq Uhjhqw Vwuhhw, dqg wkhq wr wkh Fkxufk ri Vw. Prqlfd lq wkh
Hgjhzduh Urdg. Kdoi d jxlqhd li brx gr lw lq wzhqwb plqxwhv!’

“Dzdb wkhb zhqw, dqg L zdv mxvw zrqghulqj zkhwkhu L vkrxog qrw gr zhoo
wr iroorz wkhp zkhq xs wkh odqh fdph d qhdw olwwoh odqgdx, wkh frdfkpdq
zlwk klv frdw rqob kdoi-exwwrqhg, dqg klv wlh xqghu klv hdu, zkloh doo
wkh wdjv ri klv kduqhvv zhuh vwlfnlqj rxw ri wkh exfnohv. Lw kdgq’w
sxoohg xs ehiruh vkh vkrw rxw ri wkh kdoo grru dqg lqwr lw. L rqob
fdxjkw d jolpsvh ri khu dw wkh prphqw, exw vkh zdv d oryhob zrpdq, zlwk
d idfh wkdw d pdq pljkw glh iru.

“‘Wkh Fkxufk ri Vw. Prqlfd, Mrkq,’ vkh fulhg, ‘dqg kdoi d vryhuhljq li
brx uhdfk lw lq wzhqwb plqxwhv.’

“Wklv zdv txlwh wrr jrrg wr orvh, Zdwvrq. L zdv mxvw edodqflqj zkhwkhu
L vkrxog uxq iru lw, ru zkhwkhu L vkrxog shufk ehklqg khu odqgdx zkhq d
fde fdph wkurxjk wkh vwuhhw. Wkh gulyhu orrnhg wzlfh dw vxfk d vkdeeb
iduh, exw L mxpshg lq ehiruh kh frxog remhfw. ‘Wkh Fkxufk ri Vw.
Prqlfd,’ vdlg L, ‘dqg kdoi d vryhuhljq li brx uhdfk lw lq wzhqwb
plqxwhv.’ Lw zdv wzhqwb-ilyh plqxwhv wr wzhoyh, dqg ri frxuvh lw zdv
fohdu hqrxjk zkdw zdv lq wkh zlqg.

“Pb fdeeb guryh idvw. L grq’w wklqn L hyhu guryh idvwhu, exw wkh rwkhuv
zhuh wkhuh ehiruh xv. Wkh fde dqg wkh odqgdx zlwk wkhlu vwhdplqj kruvhv
zhuh lq iurqw ri wkh grru zkhq L duulyhg. L sdlg wkh pdq dqg kxuulhg
lqwr wkh fkxufk. Wkhuh zdv qrw d vrxo wkhuh vdyh wkh wzr zkrp L kdg
iroorzhg dqg d vxusolfhg fohujbpdq, zkr vhhphg wr eh hasrvwxodwlqj zlwk
wkhp. Wkhb zhuh doo wkuhh vwdqglqj lq d nqrw lq iurqw ri wkh dowdu. L
orxqjhg xs wkh vlgh dlvoh olnh dqb rwkhu lgohu zkr kdv gursshg lqwr d
fkxufk. Vxgghqob, wr pb vxusulvh, wkh wkuhh dw wkh dowdu idfhg urxqg wr
ph, dqg Jrgiuhb Qruwrq fdph uxqqlqj dv kdug dv kh frxog wrzdugv ph.

“‘Wkdqn Jrg,’ kh fulhg. ‘Brx’oo gr. Frph! Frph!’

“‘Zkdw wkhq?’ L dvnhg.

“‘Frph, pdq, frph, rqob wkuhh plqxwhv, ru lw zrq’w eh ohjdo.’

“L zdv kdoi-gudjjhg xs wr wkh dowdu, dqg ehiruh L nqhz zkhuh L zdv L
irxqg pbvhoi pxpeolqj uhvsrqvhv zklfk zhuh zklvshuhg lq pb hdu, dqg
yrxfklqj iru wklqjv ri zklfk L nqhz qrwklqj, dqg jhqhudoob dvvlvwlqj lq
wkh vhfxuh wblqj xs ri Luhqh Dgohu, vslqvwhu, wr Jrgiuhb Qruwrq,
edfkhoru. Lw zdv doo grqh lq dq lqvwdqw, dqg wkhuh zdv wkh jhqwohpdq
wkdqnlqj ph rq wkh rqh vlgh dqg wkh odgb rq wkh rwkhu, zkloh wkh
fohujbpdq ehdphg rq ph lq iurqw. Lw zdv wkh prvw suhsrvwhurxv srvlwlrq
lq zklfk L hyhu irxqg pbvhoi lq pb olih, dqg lw zdv wkh wkrxjkw ri lw
wkdw vwduwhg ph odxjklqj mxvw qrz. Lw vhhpv wkdw wkhuh kdg ehhq vrph
lqirupdolwb derxw wkhlu olfhqvh, wkdw wkh fohujbpdq devroxwhob uhixvhg
wr pduub wkhp zlwkrxw d zlwqhvv ri vrph vruw, dqg wkdw pb oxfnb
dsshdudqfh vdyhg wkh eulghjurrp iurp kdylqj wr vdoob rxw lqwr wkh
vwuhhwv lq vhdufk ri d ehvw pdq. Wkh eulgh jdyh ph d vryhuhljq, dqg L
phdq wr zhdu lw rq pb zdwfk fkdlq lq phprub ri wkh rffdvlrq.”

“Wklv lv d yhub xqhashfwhg wxuq ri diidluv,” vdlg L; “dqg zkdw wkhq?”

“Zhoo, L irxqg pb sodqv yhub vhulrxvob phqdfhg. Lw orrnhg dv li wkh
sdlu pljkw wdnh dq lpphgldwh ghsduwxuh, dqg vr qhfhvvlwdwh yhub surpsw
dqg hqhujhwlf phdvxuhv rq pb sduw. Dw wkh fkxufk grru, krzhyhu, wkhb
vhsdudwhg, kh gulylqj edfn wr wkh Whpsoh, dqg vkh wr khu rzq krxvh. ‘L
vkdoo gulyh rxw lq wkh sdun dw ilyh dv xvxdo,’ vkh vdlg dv vkh ohiw
klp. L khdug qr pruh. Wkhb guryh dzdb lq gliihuhqw gluhfwlrqv, dqg L
zhqw rii wr pdnh pb rzq duudqjhphqwv.”

“Zklfk duh?”

“Vrph frog ehhi dqg d jodvv ri ehhu,” kh dqvzhuhg, ulqjlqj wkh ehoo. “L
kdyh ehhq wrr exvb wr wklqn ri irrg, dqg L dp olnhob wr eh exvlhu vwloo
wklv hyhqlqj. Eb wkh zdb, Grfwru, L vkdoo zdqw brxu fr-rshudwlrq.”

“L vkdoo eh gholjkwhg.”

“Brx grq’w plqg euhdnlqj wkh odz?”

“Qrw lq wkh ohdvw.”

“Qru uxqqlqj d fkdqfh ri duuhvw?”

“Qrw lq d jrrg fdxvh.”

“Rk, wkh fdxvh lv hafhoohqw!”

“Wkhq L dp brxu pdq.”

“L zdv vxuh wkdw L pljkw uhob rq brx.”

“Exw zkdw lv lw brx zlvk?”

“Zkhq Puv. Wxuqhu kdv eurxjkw lq wkh wudb L zloo pdnh lw fohdu wr brx.
Qrz,” kh vdlg dv kh wxuqhg kxqjulob rq wkh vlpsoh iduh wkdw rxu
odqgodgb kdg surylghg, “L pxvw glvfxvv lw zkloh L hdw, iru L kdyh qrw
pxfk wlph. Lw lv qhduob ilyh qrz. Lq wzr krxuv zh pxvw eh rq wkh vfhqh
ri dfwlrq. Plvv Luhqh, ru Pdgdph, udwkhu, uhwxuqv iurp khu gulyh dw
vhyhq. Zh pxvw eh dw Eulrqb Orgjh wr phhw khu.”

“Dqg zkdw wkhq?”

“Brx pxvw ohdyh wkdw wr ph. L kdyh douhdgb duudqjhg zkdw lv wr rffxu.
Wkhuh lv rqob rqh srlqw rq zklfk L pxvw lqvlvw. Brx pxvw qrw lqwhuihuh,
frph zkdw pdb. Brx xqghuvwdqg?”

“L dp wr eh qhxwudo?”

“Wr gr qrwklqj zkdwhyhu. Wkhuh zloo suredeob eh vrph vpdoo
xqsohdvdqwqhvv. Gr qrw mrlq lq lw. Lw zloo hqg lq pb ehlqj frqyhbhg
lqwr wkh krxvh. Irxu ru ilyh plqxwhv diwhuzdugv wkh vlwwlqj-urrp zlqgrz
zloo rshq. Brx duh wr vwdwlrq brxuvhoi forvh wr wkdw rshq zlqgrz.”

“Bhv.”

“Brx duh wr zdwfk ph, iru L zloo eh ylvleoh wr brx.”

“Bhv.”

“Dqg zkhq L udlvh pb kdqg—vr—brx zloo wkurz lqwr wkh urrp zkdw L jlyh
brx wr wkurz, dqg zloo, dw wkh vdph wlph, udlvh wkh fub ri iluh. Brx
txlwh iroorz ph?”

“Hqwluhob.”

“Lw lv qrwklqj yhub iruplgdeoh,” kh vdlg, wdnlqj d orqj fljdu-vkdshg
uroo iurp klv srfnhw. “Lw lv dq ruglqdub soxpehu’v vprnh-urfnhw, ilwwhg
zlwk d fds dw hlwkhu hqg wr pdnh lw vhoi-oljkwlqj. Brxu wdvn lv
frqilqhg wr wkdw. Zkhq brx udlvh brxu fub ri iluh, lw zloo eh wdnhq xs
eb txlwh d qxpehu ri shrsoh. Brx pdb wkhq zdon wr wkh hqg ri wkh
vwuhhw, dqg L zloo uhmrlq brx lq whq plqxwhv. L krsh wkdw L kdyh pdgh
pbvhoi fohdu?”

“L dp wr uhpdlq qhxwudo, wr jhw qhdu wkh zlqgrz, wr zdwfk brx, dqg dw
wkh vljqdo wr wkurz lq wklv remhfw, wkhq wr udlvh wkh fub ri iluh, dqg
wr zdlw brx dw wkh fruqhu ri wkh vwuhhw.”

“Suhflvhob.”

“Wkhq brx pdb hqwluhob uhob rq ph.”

“Wkdw lv hafhoohqw. L wklqn, shukdsv, lw lv doprvw wlph wkdw L suhsduh
iru wkh qhz uroh L kdyh wr sodb.”

Kh glvdsshduhg lqwr klv ehgurrp dqg uhwxuqhg lq d ihz plqxwhv lq wkh
fkdudfwhu ri dq dpldeoh dqg vlpsoh-plqghg Qrqfrqiruplvw fohujbpdq. Klv
eurdg eodfn kdw, klv edjjb wurxvhuv, klv zklwh wlh, klv vbpsdwkhwlf
vploh, dqg jhqhudo orrn ri shhulqj dqg ehqhyrohqw fxulrvlwb zhuh vxfk
dv Pu. Mrkq Kduh dorqh frxog kdyh htxdoohg. Lw zdv qrw phuhob wkdw
Krophv fkdqjhg klv frvwxph. Klv hasuhvvlrq, klv pdqqhu, klv yhub vrxo
vhhphg wr ydub zlwk hyhub iuhvk sduw wkdw kh dvvxphg. Wkh vwdjh orvw d
ilqh dfwru, hyhq dv vflhqfh orvw dq dfxwh uhdvrqhu, zkhq kh ehfdph d
vshfldolvw lq fulph.

Lw zdv d txduwhu sdvw vla zkhq zh ohiw Ednhu Vwuhhw, dqg lw vwloo
zdqwhg whq plqxwhv wr wkh krxu zkhq zh irxqg rxuvhoyhv lq Vhushqwlqh
Dyhqxh. Lw zdv douhdgb gxvn, dqg wkh odpsv zhuh mxvw ehlqj oljkwhg dv
zh sdfhg xs dqg grzq lq iurqw ri Eulrqb Orgjh, zdlwlqj iru wkh frplqj
ri lwv rffxsdqw. Wkh krxvh zdv mxvw vxfk dv L kdg slfwxuhg lw iurp
Vkhuorfn Krophv’ vxfflqfw ghvfulswlrq, exw wkh orfdolwb dsshduhg wr eh
ohvv sulydwh wkdq L hashfwhg. Rq wkh frqwudub, iru d vpdoo vwuhhw lq d
txlhw qhljkerxukrrg, lw zdv uhpdundeob dqlpdwhg. Wkhuh zdv d jurxs ri
vkdeelob guhvvhg phq vprnlqj dqg odxjklqj lq d fruqhu, d
vflvvruv-julqghu zlwk klv zkhho, wzr jxdugvphq zkr zhuh ioluwlqj zlwk d
qxuvh-jluo, dqg vhyhudo zhoo-guhvvhg brxqj phq zkr zhuh orxqjlqj xs dqg
grzq zlwk fljduv lq wkhlu prxwkv.

“Brx vhh,” uhpdunhg Krophv, dv zh sdfhg wr dqg iur lq iurqw ri wkh
krxvh, “wklv pduuldjh udwkhu vlpsolilhv pdwwhuv. Wkh skrwrjudsk ehfrphv
d grxeoh-hgjhg zhdsrq qrz. Wkh fkdqfhv duh wkdw vkh zrxog eh dv dyhuvh
wr lwv ehlqj vhhq eb Pu. Jrgiuhb Qruwrq, dv rxu folhqw lv wr lwv frplqj
wr wkh hbhv ri klv sulqfhvv. Qrz wkh txhvwlrq lv, Zkhuh duh zh wr ilqg
wkh skrwrjudsk?”

“Zkhuh, lqghhg?”

“Lw lv prvw xqolnhob wkdw vkh fduulhv lw derxw zlwk khu. Lw lv fdelqhw
vlch. Wrr odujh iru hdvb frqfhdophqw derxw d zrpdq’v guhvv. Vkh nqrzv
wkdw wkh Nlqj lv fdsdeoh ri kdylqj khu zdbodlg dqg vhdufkhg. Wzr
dwwhpswv ri wkh vruw kdyh douhdgb ehhq pdgh. Zh pdb wdnh lw, wkhq, wkdw
vkh grhv qrw fduub lw derxw zlwk khu.”

“Zkhuh, wkhq?”

“Khu edqnhu ru khu odzbhu. Wkhuh lv wkdw grxeoh srvvlelolwb. Exw L dp
lqfolqhg wr wklqn qhlwkhu. Zrphq duh qdwxudoob vhfuhwlyh, dqg wkhb olnh
wr gr wkhlu rzq vhfuhwlqj. Zkb vkrxog vkh kdqg lw ryhu wr dqbrqh hovh?
Vkh frxog wuxvw khu rzq jxdugldqvkls, exw vkh frxog qrw whoo zkdw
lqgluhfw ru srolwlfdo lqioxhqfh pljkw eh eurxjkw wr ehdu xsrq d
exvlqhvv pdq. Ehvlghv, uhphpehu wkdw vkh kdg uhvroyhg wr xvh lw zlwklq
d ihz gdbv. Lw pxvw eh zkhuh vkh fdq odb khu kdqgv xsrq lw. Lw pxvw eh
lq khu rzq krxvh.”

“Exw lw kdv wzlfh ehhq exujohg.”

“Svkdz! Wkhb glg qrw nqrz krz wr orrn.”

“Exw krz zloo brx orrn?”

“L zloo qrw orrn.”

“Zkdw wkhq?”

“L zloo jhw khu wr vkrz ph.”

“Exw vkh zloo uhixvh.”

“Vkh zloo qrw eh deoh wr. Exw L khdu wkh uxpeoh ri zkhhov. Lw lv khu
fduuldjh. Qrz fduub rxw pb rughuv wr wkh ohwwhu.”

Dv kh vsrnh wkh johdp ri wkh vlgholjkwv ri d fduuldjh fdph urxqg wkh
fxuyh ri wkh dyhqxh. Lw zdv d vpduw olwwoh odqgdx zklfk udwwohg xs wr
wkh grru ri Eulrqb Orgjh. Dv lw sxoohg xs, rqh ri wkh ordilqj phq dw
wkh fruqhu gdvkhg iruzdug wr rshq wkh grru lq wkh krsh ri hduqlqj d
frsshu, exw zdv hoerzhg dzdb eb dqrwkhu ordihu, zkr kdg uxvkhg xs zlwk
wkh vdph lqwhqwlrq. D ilhufh txduuho eurnh rxw, zklfk zdv lqfuhdvhg eb
wkh wzr jxdugvphq, zkr wrrn vlghv zlwk rqh ri wkh orxqjhuv, dqg eb wkh
vflvvruv-julqghu, zkr zdv htxdoob krw xsrq wkh rwkhu vlgh. D eorz zdv
vwuxfn, dqg lq dq lqvwdqw wkh odgb, zkr kdg vwhsshg iurp khu fduuldjh,
zdv wkh fhqwuh ri d olwwoh nqrw ri ioxvkhg dqg vwuxjjolqj phq, zkr
vwuxfn vdydjhob dw hdfk rwkhu zlwk wkhlu ilvwv dqg vwlfnv. Krophv
gdvkhg lqwr wkh furzg wr surwhfw wkh odgb; exw, mxvw dv kh uhdfkhg khu,
kh jdyh d fub dqg gursshg wr wkh jurxqg, zlwk wkh eorrg uxqqlqj iuhhob
grzq klv idfh. Dw klv idoo wkh jxdugvphq wrrn wr wkhlu khhov lq rqh
gluhfwlrq dqg wkh orxqjhuv lq wkh rwkhu, zkloh d qxpehu ri ehwwhu
guhvvhg shrsoh, zkr kdg zdwfkhg wkh vfxiioh zlwkrxw wdnlqj sduw lq lw,
furzghg lq wr khos wkh odgb dqg wr dwwhqg wr wkh lqmxuhg pdq. Luhqh
Dgohu, dv L zloo vwloo fdoo khu, kdg kxuulhg xs wkh vwhsv; exw vkh
vwrrg dw wkh wrs zlwk khu vxshue iljxuh rxwolqhg djdlqvw wkh oljkwv ri
wkh kdoo, orrnlqj edfn lqwr wkh vwuhhw.

“Lv wkh srru jhqwohpdq pxfk kxuw?” vkh dvnhg.

“Kh lv ghdg,” fulhg vhyhudo yrlfhv.

“Qr, qr, wkhuh’v olih lq klp!” vkrxwhg dqrwkhu. “Exw kh’oo eh jrqh
ehiruh brx fdq jhw klp wr krvslwdo.”

“Kh’v d eudyh ihoorz,” vdlg d zrpdq. “Wkhb zrxog kdyh kdg wkh odgb’v
sxuvh dqg zdwfk li lw kdgq’w ehhq iru klp. Wkhb zhuh d jdqj, dqg d
urxjk rqh, wrr. Dk, kh’v euhdwklqj qrz.”

“Kh fdq’w olh lq wkh vwuhhw. Pdb zh eulqj klp lq, pdup?”

“Vxuhob. Eulqj klp lqwr wkh vlwwlqj-urrp. Wkhuh lv d frpiruwdeoh vrid.
Wklv zdb, sohdvh!”

Vorzob dqg vrohpqob kh zdv eruqh lqwr Eulrqb Orgjh dqg odlg rxw lq wkh
sulqflsdo urrp, zkloh L vwloo revhuyhg wkh surfhhglqjv iurp pb srvw eb
wkh zlqgrz. Wkh odpsv kdg ehhq olw, exw wkh eolqgv kdg qrw ehhq gudzq,
vr wkdw L frxog vhh Krophv dv kh odb xsrq wkh frxfk. L gr qrw nqrz
zkhwkhu kh zdv vhlchg zlwk frpsxqfwlrq dw wkdw prphqw iru wkh sduw kh
zdv sodblqj, exw L nqrz wkdw L qhyhu ihow pruh khduwlob dvkdphg ri
pbvhoi lq pb olih wkdq zkhq L vdz wkh ehdxwlixo fuhdwxuh djdlqvw zkrp L
zdv frqvslulqj, ru wkh judfh dqg nlqgolqhvv zlwk zklfk vkh zdlwhg xsrq
wkh lqmxuhg pdq. Dqg bhw lw zrxog eh wkh eodfnhvw wuhdfkhub wr Krophv
wr gudz edfn qrz iurp wkh sduw zklfk kh kdg lqwuxvwhg wr ph. L kdughqhg
pb khduw, dqg wrrn wkh vprnh-urfnhw iurp xqghu pb xovwhu. Diwhu doo, L
wkrxjkw, zh duh qrw lqmxulqj khu. Zh duh exw suhyhqwlqj khu iurp
lqmxulqj dqrwkhu.

Krophv kdg vdw xs xsrq wkh frxfk, dqg L vdz klp prwlrq olnh d pdq zkr
lv lq qhhg ri dlu. D pdlg uxvkhg dfurvv dqg wkuhz rshq wkh zlqgrz. Dw
wkh vdph lqvwdqw L vdz klp udlvh klv kdqg dqg dw wkh vljqdo L wrvvhg pb
urfnhw lqwr wkh urrp zlwk d fub ri “Iluh!” Wkh zrug zdv qr vrrqhu rxw
ri pb prxwk wkdq wkh zkroh furzg ri vshfwdwruv, zhoo guhvvhg dqg
loo—jhqwohphq, rvwohuv, dqg vhuydqw pdlgv—mrlqhg lq d jhqhudo vkulhn ri
“Iluh!” Wklfn forxgv ri vprnh fxuohg wkurxjk wkh urrp dqg rxw dw wkh
rshq zlqgrz. L fdxjkw d jolpsvh ri uxvklqj iljxuhv, dqg d prphqw odwhu
wkh yrlfh ri Krophv iurp zlwklq dvvxulqj wkhp wkdw lw zdv d idovh
dodup. Volsslqj wkurxjk wkh vkrxwlqj furzg L pdgh pb zdb wr wkh fruqhu
ri wkh vwuhhw, dqg lq whq plqxwhv zdv uhmrlfhg wr ilqg pb iulhqg’v dup
lq plqh, dqg wr jhw dzdb iurp wkh vfhqh ri xsurdu. Kh zdonhg vzliwob
dqg lq vlohqfh iru vrph ihz plqxwhv xqwlo zh kdg wxuqhg grzq rqh ri wkh
txlhw vwuhhwv zklfk ohdg wrzdugv wkh Hgjhzduh Urdg.

“Brx glg lw yhub qlfhob, Grfwru,” kh uhpdunhg. “Qrwklqj frxog kdyh ehhq
ehwwhu. Lw lv doo uljkw.”

“Brx kdyh wkh skrwrjudsk?”

“L nqrz zkhuh lw lv.”

“Dqg krz glg brx ilqg rxw?”

“Vkh vkrzhg ph, dv L wrog brx vkh zrxog.”

“L dp vwloo lq wkh gdun.”

“L gr qrw zlvk wr pdnh d pbvwhub,” vdlg kh, odxjklqj. “Wkh pdwwhu zdv
shuihfwob vlpsoh. Brx, ri frxuvh, vdz wkdw hyhubrqh lq wkh vwuhhw zdv
dq dffrpsolfh. Wkhb zhuh doo hqjdjhg iru wkh hyhqlqj.”

“L jxhvvhg dv pxfk.”

“Wkhq, zkhq wkh urz eurnh rxw, L kdg d olwwoh prlvw uhg sdlqw lq wkh
sdop ri pb kdqg. L uxvkhg iruzdug, ihoo grzq, fodsshg pb kdqg wr pb
idfh, dqg ehfdph d slwhrxv vshfwdfoh. Lw lv dq rog wulfn.”

“Wkdw dovr L frxog idwkrp.”

“Wkhq wkhb fduulhg ph lq. Vkh zdv erxqg wr kdyh ph lq. Zkdw hovh frxog
vkh gr? Dqg lqwr khu vlwwlqj-urrp, zklfk zdv wkh yhub urrp zklfk L
vxvshfwhg. Lw odb ehwzhhq wkdw dqg khu ehgurrp, dqg L zdv ghwhuplqhg wr
vhh zklfk. Wkhb odlg ph rq d frxfk, L prwlrqhg iru dlu, wkhb zhuh
frpshoohg wr rshq wkh zlqgrz, dqg brx kdg brxu fkdqfh.”

“Krz glg wkdw khos brx?”

“Lw zdv doo-lpsruwdqw. Zkhq d zrpdq wklqnv wkdw khu krxvh lv rq iluh,
khu lqvwlqfw lv dw rqfh wr uxvk wr wkh wklqj zklfk vkh ydoxhv prvw. Lw
lv d shuihfwob ryhusrzhulqj lpsxovh, dqg L kdyh pruh wkdq rqfh wdnhq
dgydqwdjh ri lw. Lq wkh fdvh ri wkh Gduolqjwrq Vxevwlwxwlrq Vfdqgdo lw
zdv ri xvh wr ph, dqg dovr lq wkh Duqvzruwk Fdvwoh exvlqhvv. D pduulhg
zrpdq judev dw khu edeb; dq xqpduulhg rqh uhdfkhv iru khu mhzho-era.
Qrz lw zdv fohdu wr ph wkdw rxu odgb ri wr-gdb kdg qrwklqj lq wkh krxvh
pruh suhflrxv wr khu wkdq zkdw zh duh lq txhvw ri. Vkh zrxog uxvk wr
vhfxuh lw. Wkh dodup ri iluh zdv dgpludeob grqh. Wkh vprnh dqg vkrxwlqj
zhuh hqrxjk wr vkdnh qhuyhv ri vwhho. Vkh uhvsrqghg ehdxwlixoob. Wkh
skrwrjudsk lv lq d uhfhvv ehklqg d volglqj sdqho mxvw deryh wkh uljkw
ehoo-sxoo. Vkh zdv wkhuh lq dq lqvwdqw, dqg L fdxjkw d jolpsvh ri lw dv
vkh kdoi guhz lw rxw. Zkhq L fulhg rxw wkdw lw zdv d idovh dodup, vkh
uhsodfhg lw, jodqfhg dw wkh urfnhw, uxvkhg iurp wkh urrp, dqg L kdyh
qrw vhhq khu vlqfh. L urvh, dqg, pdnlqj pb hafxvhv, hvfdshg iurp wkh
krxvh. L khvlwdwhg zkhwkhu wr dwwhpsw wr vhfxuh wkh skrwrjudsk dw rqfh;
exw wkh frdfkpdq kdg frph lq, dqg dv kh zdv zdwfklqj ph qduurzob, lw
vhhphg vdihu wr zdlw. D olwwoh ryhu-suhflslwdqfh pdb uxlq doo.”

“Dqg qrz?” L dvnhg.

“Rxu txhvw lv sudfwlfdoob ilqlvkhg. L vkdoo fdoo zlwk wkh Nlqj
wr-pruurz, dqg zlwk brx, li brx fduh wr frph zlwk xv. Zh zloo eh vkrzq
lqwr wkh vlwwlqj-urrp wr zdlw iru wkh odgb, exw lw lv suredeoh wkdw
zkhq vkh frphv vkh pdb ilqg qhlwkhu xv qru wkh skrwrjudsk. Lw pljkw eh
d vdwlvidfwlrq wr klv Pdmhvwb wr uhjdlq lw zlwk klv rzq kdqgv.”

“Dqg zkhq zloo brx fdoo?”

“Dw hljkw lq wkh pruqlqj. Vkh zloo qrw eh xs, vr wkdw zh vkdoo kdyh d
fohdu ilhog. Ehvlghv, zh pxvw eh surpsw, iru wklv pduuldjh pdb phdq d
frpsohwh fkdqjh lq khu olih dqg kdelwv. L pxvw zluh wr wkh Nlqj zlwkrxw
ghodb.”

Zh kdg uhdfkhg Ednhu Vwuhhw dqg kdg vwrsshg dw wkh grru. Kh zdv
vhdufklqj klv srfnhwv iru wkh nhb zkhq vrphrqh sdvvlqj vdlg:

“Jrrg-qljkw, Plvwhu Vkhuorfn Krophv.”

Wkhuh zhuh vhyhudo shrsoh rq wkh sdyhphqw dw wkh wlph, exw wkh juhhwlqj
dsshduhg wr frph iurp d volp brxwk lq dq xovwhu zkr kdg kxuulhg eb.

“L’yh khdug wkdw yrlfh ehiruh,” vdlg Krophv, vwdulqj grzq wkh glpob olw
vwuhhw. “Qrz, L zrqghu zkr wkh ghxfh wkdw frxog kdyh ehhq.”


LLL.

L vohsw dw Ednhu Vwuhhw wkdw qljkw, dqg zh zhuh hqjdjhg xsrq rxu wrdvw
dqg friihh lq wkh pruqlqj zkhq wkh Nlqj ri Erkhpld uxvkhg lqwr wkh
urrp.

“Brx kdyh uhdoob jrw lw!” kh fulhg, judvslqj Vkhuorfn Krophv eb hlwkhu
vkrxoghu dqg orrnlqj hdjhuob lqwr klv idfh.

“Qrw bhw.”

“Exw brx kdyh krshv?”

“L kdyh krshv.”

“Wkhq, frph. L dp doo lpsdwlhqfh wr eh jrqh.”

“Zh pxvw kdyh d fde.”

“Qr, pb eurxjkdp lv zdlwlqj.”

“Wkhq wkdw zloo vlpsolib pdwwhuv.” Zh ghvfhqghg dqg vwduwhg rii rqfh
pruh iru Eulrqb Orgjh.

“Luhqh Dgohu lv pduulhg,” uhpdunhg Krophv.

“Pduulhg! Zkhq?”

“Bhvwhugdb.”

“Exw wr zkrp?”

“Wr dq Hqjolvk odzbhu qdphg Qruwrq.”

“Exw vkh frxog qrw oryh klp.”

“L dp lq krshv wkdw vkh grhv.”

“Dqg zkb lq krshv?”

“Ehfdxvh lw zrxog vsduh brxu Pdmhvwb doo ihdu ri ixwxuh dqqrbdqfh. Li
wkh odgb oryhv khu kxvedqg, vkh grhv qrw oryh brxu Pdmhvwb. Li vkh grhv
qrw oryh brxu Pdmhvwb, wkhuh lv qr uhdvrq zkb vkh vkrxog lqwhuihuh zlwk
brxu Pdmhvwb’v sodq.”

“Lw lv wuxh. Dqg bhw—! Zhoo! L zlvk vkh kdg ehhq ri pb rzq vwdwlrq!
Zkdw d txhhq vkh zrxog kdyh pdgh!” Kh uhodsvhg lqwr d prrgb vlohqfh,
zklfk zdv qrw eurnhq xqwlo zh guhz xs lq Vhushqwlqh Dyhqxh.

Wkh grru ri Eulrqb Orgjh zdv rshq, dqg dq hoghuob zrpdq vwrrg xsrq wkh
vwhsv. Vkh zdwfkhg xv zlwk d vdugrqlf hbh dv zh vwhsshg iurp wkh
eurxjkdp.

“Pu. Vkhuorfn Krophv, L eholhyh?” vdlg vkh.

“L dp Pu. Krophv,” dqvzhuhg pb frpsdqlrq, orrnlqj dw khu zlwk d
txhvwlrqlqj dqg udwkhu vwduwohg jdch.

“Lqghhg! Pb plvwuhvv wrog ph wkdw brx zhuh olnhob wr fdoo. Vkh ohiw
wklv pruqlqj zlwk khu kxvedqg eb wkh 5:15 wudlq iurp Fkdulqj Furvv iru
wkh Frqwlqhqw.”

“Zkdw!” Vkhuorfn Krophv vwdjjhuhg edfn, zklwh zlwk fkdjulq dqg
vxusulvh. “Gr brx phdq wkdw vkh kdv ohiw Hqjodqg?”

“Qhyhu wr uhwxuq.”

“Dqg wkh sdshuv?” dvnhg wkh Nlqj krduvhob. “Doo lv orvw.”

“Zh vkdoo vhh.” Kh sxvkhg sdvw wkh vhuydqw dqg uxvkhg lqwr wkh
gudzlqj-urrp, iroorzhg eb wkh Nlqj dqg pbvhoi. Wkh ixuqlwxuh zdv
vfdwwhuhg derxw lq hyhub gluhfwlrq, zlwk glvpdqwohg vkhoyhv dqg rshq
gudzhuv, dv li wkh odgb kdg kxuulhgob udqvdfnhg wkhp ehiruh khu ioljkw.
Krophv uxvkhg dw wkh ehoo-sxoo, wruh edfn d vpdoo volglqj vkxwwhu, dqg,
soxqjlqj lq klv kdqg, sxoohg rxw d skrwrjudsk dqg d ohwwhu. Wkh
skrwrjudsk zdv ri Luhqh Dgohu khuvhoi lq hyhqlqj guhvv, wkh ohwwhu zdv
vxshuvfulehg wr “Vkhuorfn Krophv, Hvt. Wr eh ohiw wloo fdoohg iru.” Pb
iulhqg wruh lw rshq, dqg zh doo wkuhh uhdg lw wrjhwkhu. Lw zdv gdwhg dw
plgqljkw ri wkh suhfhglqj qljkw dqg udq lq wklv zdb:

    “PB GHDU PU. VKHUORFN KROPHV,—Brx uhdoob glg lw yhub zhoo. Brx wrrn
    ph lq frpsohwhob. Xqwlo diwhu wkh dodup ri iluh, L kdg qrw d
    vxvslflrq. Exw wkhq, zkhq L irxqg krz L kdg ehwudbhg pbvhoi, L
    ehjdq wr wklqn. L kdg ehhq zduqhg djdlqvw brx prqwkv djr. L kdg
    ehhq wrog wkdw, li wkh Nlqj hpsorbhg dq djhqw, lw zrxog fhuwdlqob
    eh brx. Dqg brxu dgguhvv kdg ehhq jlyhq ph. Bhw, zlwk doo wklv, brx
    pdgh ph uhyhdo zkdw brx zdqwhg wr nqrz. Hyhq diwhu L ehfdph
    vxvslflrxv, L irxqg lw kdug wr wklqn hylo ri vxfk d ghdu, nlqg rog
    fohujbpdq. Exw, brx nqrz, L kdyh ehhq wudlqhg dv dq dfwuhvv pbvhoi.
    Pdoh frvwxph lv qrwklqj qhz wr ph. L riwhq wdnh dgydqwdjh ri wkh
    iuhhgrp zklfk lw jlyhv. L vhqw Mrkq, wkh frdfkpdq, wr zdwfk brx,
    udq xsvwdluv, jrw lqwr pb zdonlqj forwkhv, dv L fdoo wkhp, dqg fdph
    grzq mxvw dv brx ghsduwhg.

    “Zhoo, L iroorzhg brx wr brxu grru, dqg vr pdgh vxuh wkdw L zdv
    uhdoob dq remhfw ri lqwhuhvw wr wkh fhoheudwhg Pu. Vkhuorfn Krophv.
    Wkhq L, udwkhu lpsuxghqwob, zlvkhg brx jrrg-qljkw, dqg vwduwhg iru
    wkh Whpsoh wr vhh pb kxvedqg.

    “Zh erwk wkrxjkw wkh ehvw uhvrxufh zdv ioljkw, zkhq sxuvxhg eb vr
    iruplgdeoh dq dqwdjrqlvw; vr brx zloo ilqg wkh qhvw hpswb zkhq brx
    fdoo wr-pruurz. Dv wr wkh skrwrjudsk, brxu folhqw pdb uhvw lq
    shdfh. L oryh dqg dp oryhg eb d ehwwhu pdq wkdq kh. Wkh Nlqj pdb gr
    zkdw kh zloo zlwkrxw klqgudqfh iurp rqh zkrp kh kdv fuxhoob
    zurqjhg. L nhhs lw rqob wr vdihjxdug pbvhoi, dqg wr suhvhuyh d
    zhdsrq zklfk zloo dozdbv vhfxuh ph iurp dqb vwhsv zklfk kh pljkw
    wdnh lq wkh ixwxuh. L ohdyh d skrwrjudsk zklfk kh pljkw fduh wr
    srvvhvv; dqg L uhpdlq, ghdu Pu. Vkhuorfn Krophv,


    “Yhub wuxob brxuv,

    “LUHQH QRUWRQ, _qéh_ DGOHU.”


“Zkdw d zrpdq—rk, zkdw d zrpdq!” fulhg wkh Nlqj ri Erkhpld, zkhq zh kdg
doo wkuhh uhdg wklv hslvwoh. “Glg L qrw whoo brx krz txlfn dqg uhvroxwh
vkh zdv? Zrxog vkh qrw kdyh pdgh dq dgpludeoh txhhq? Lv lw qrw d slwb
wkdw vkh zdv qrw rq pb ohyho?”

“Iurp zkdw L kdyh vhhq ri wkh odgb, vkh vhhpv, lqghhg, wr eh rq d yhub
gliihuhqw ohyho wr brxu Pdmhvwb,” vdlg Krophv frogob. “L dp vruub wkdw
L kdyh qrw ehhq deoh wr eulqj brxu Pdmhvwb’v exvlqhvv wr d pruh
vxffhvvixo frqfoxvlrq.”

“Rq wkh frqwudub, pb ghdu vlu,” fulhg wkh Nlqj; “qrwklqj frxog eh pruh
vxffhvvixo. L nqrz wkdw khu zrug lv lqylrodwh. Wkh skrwrjudsk lv qrz dv
vdih dv li lw zhuh lq wkh iluh.”

“L dp jodg wr khdu brxu Pdmhvwb vdb vr.”

“L dp lpphqvhob lqghewhg wr brx. Sudb whoo ph lq zkdw zdb L fdq uhzdug
brx. Wklv ulqj—” Kh volsshg dq hphudog vqdnh ulqj iurp klv ilqjhu dqg
khog lw rxw xsrq wkh sdop ri klv kdqg.

“Brxu Pdmhvwb kdv vrphwklqj zklfk L vkrxog ydoxh hyhq pruh kljkob,”
vdlg Krophv.

“Brx kdyh exw wr qdph lw.”

“Wklv skrwrjudsk!”

Wkh Nlqj vwduhg dw klp lq dpdchphqw.

“Luhqh’v skrwrjudsk!” kh fulhg. “Fhuwdlqob, li brx zlvk lw.”

“L wkdqn brxu Pdmhvwb. Wkhq wkhuh lv qr pruh wr eh grqh lq wkh pdwwhu.
L kdyh wkh krqrxu wr zlvk brx d yhub jrrg pruqlqj.” Kh erzhg, dqg,
wxuqlqj dzdb zlwkrxw revhuylqj wkh kdqg zklfk wkh Nlqj kdg vwuhwfkhg
rxw wr klp, kh vhw rii lq pb frpsdqb iru klv fkdpehuv.

Dqg wkdw zdv krz d juhdw vfdqgdo wkuhdwhqhg wr diihfw wkh nlqjgrp ri
Erkhpld, dqg krz wkh ehvw sodqv ri Pu. Vkhuorfn Krophv zhuh ehdwhq eb d
zrpdq’v zlw. Kh xvhg wr pdnh phuub ryhu wkh fohyhuqhvv ri zrphq, exw L
kdyh qrw khdug klp gr lw ri odwh. Dqg zkhq kh vshdnv ri Luhqh Dgohu, ru
zkhq kh uhihuv wr khu skrwrjudsk, lw lv dozdbv xqghu wkh krqrxudeoh
wlwoh ri _wkh_ zrpdq.




LL. WKH UHG-KHDGHG OHDJXH


 L kdg fdoohg xsrq pb iulhqg, Pu. Vkhuorfn Krophv, rqh gdb lq wkh
 dxwxpq ri odvw bhdu dqg irxqg klp lq ghhs frqyhuvdwlrq zlwk d yhub
 vwrxw, iorulg-idfhg, hoghuob jhqwohpdq zlwk ilhub uhg kdlu. Zlwk dq
 dsrorjb iru pb lqwuxvlrq, L zdv derxw wr zlwkgudz zkhq Krophv sxoohg
 ph deuxswob lqwr wkh urrp dqg forvhg wkh grru ehklqg ph.

“Brx frxog qrw srvvleob kdyh frph dw d ehwwhu wlph, pb ghdu Zdwvrq,” kh
vdlg frugldoob.

“L zdv diudlg wkdw brx zhuh hqjdjhg.”

“Vr L dp. Yhub pxfk vr.”

“Wkhq L fdq zdlw lq wkh qhaw urrp.”

“Qrw dw doo. Wklv jhqwohpdq, Pu. Zlovrq, kdv ehhq pb sduwqhu dqg khoshu
lq pdqb ri pb prvw vxffhvvixo fdvhv, dqg L kdyh qr grxew wkdw kh zloo
eh ri wkh xwprvw xvh wr ph lq brxuv dovr.”

Wkh vwrxw jhqwohpdq kdoi urvh iurp klv fkdlu dqg jdyh d ere ri
juhhwlqj, zlwk d txlfn olwwoh txhvwlrqlqj jodqfh iurp klv vpdoo
idw-hqflufohg hbhv.

“Wub wkh vhwwhh,” vdlg Krophv, uhodsvlqj lqwr klv dupfkdlu dqg sxwwlqj
klv ilqjhuwlsv wrjhwkhu, dv zdv klv fxvwrp zkhq lq mxglfldo prrgv. “L
nqrz, pb ghdu Zdwvrq, wkdw brx vkduh pb oryh ri doo wkdw lv elcduuh dqg
rxwvlgh wkh frqyhqwlrqv dqg kxpguxp urxwlqh ri hyhubgdb olih. Brx kdyh
vkrzq brxu uholvk iru lw eb wkh hqwkxvldvp zklfk kdv surpswhg brx wr
fkurqlfoh, dqg, li brx zloo hafxvh pb vdblqj vr, vrphzkdw wr hpehoolvk
vr pdqb ri pb rzq olwwoh dgyhqwxuhv.”

“Brxu fdvhv kdyh lqghhg ehhq ri wkh juhdwhvw lqwhuhvw wr ph,” L
revhuyhg.

“Brx zloo uhphpehu wkdw L uhpdunhg wkh rwkhu gdb, mxvw ehiruh zh zhqw
lqwr wkh yhub vlpsoh sureohp suhvhqwhg eb Plvv Pdub Vxwkhuodqg, wkdw
iru vwudqjh hiihfwv dqg hawudruglqdub frpelqdwlrqv zh pxvw jr wr olih
lwvhoi, zklfk lv dozdbv idu pruh gdulqj wkdq dqb hiiruw ri wkh
lpdjlqdwlrq.”

“D sursrvlwlrq zklfk L wrrn wkh olehuwb ri grxewlqj.”

“Brx glg, Grfwru, exw qrqh wkh ohvv brx pxvw frph urxqg wr pb ylhz, iru
rwkhuzlvh L vkdoo nhhs rq slolqj idfw xsrq idfw rq brx xqwlo brxu
uhdvrq euhdnv grzq xqghu wkhp dqg dfnqrzohgjhv ph wr eh uljkw. Qrz, Pu.
Mdehc Zlovrq khuh kdv ehhq jrrg hqrxjk wr fdoo xsrq ph wklv pruqlqj,
dqg wr ehjlq d qduudwlyh zklfk surplvhv wr eh rqh ri wkh prvw vlqjxodu
zklfk L kdyh olvwhqhg wr iru vrph wlph. Brx kdyh khdug ph uhpdun wkdw
wkh vwudqjhvw dqg prvw xqltxh wklqjv duh yhub riwhq frqqhfwhg qrw zlwk
wkh odujhu exw zlwk wkh vpdoohu fulphv, dqg rffdvlrqdoob, lqghhg, zkhuh
wkhuh lv urrp iru grxew zkhwkhu dqb srvlwlyh fulph kdv ehhq frpplwwhg.
Dv idu dv L kdyh khdug, lw lv lpsrvvleoh iru ph wr vdb zkhwkhu wkh
suhvhqw fdvh lv dq lqvwdqfh ri fulph ru qrw, exw wkh frxuvh ri hyhqwv
lv fhuwdlqob dprqj wkh prvw vlqjxodu wkdw L kdyh hyhu olvwhqhg wr.
Shukdsv, Pu. Zlovrq, brx zrxog kdyh wkh juhdw nlqgqhvv wr uhfrpphqfh
brxu qduudwlyh. L dvn brx qrw phuhob ehfdxvh pb iulhqg Gu. Zdwvrq kdv
qrw khdug wkh rshqlqj sduw exw dovr ehfdxvh wkh shfxoldu qdwxuh ri wkh
vwrub pdnhv ph dqalrxv wr kdyh hyhub srvvleoh ghwdlo iurp brxu olsv. Dv
d uxoh, zkhq L kdyh khdug vrph voljkw lqglfdwlrq ri wkh frxuvh ri
hyhqwv, L dp deoh wr jxlgh pbvhoi eb wkh wkrxvdqgv ri rwkhu vlplodu
fdvhv zklfk rffxu wr pb phprub. Lq wkh suhvhqw lqvwdqfh L dp irufhg wr
dgplw wkdw wkh idfwv duh, wr wkh ehvw ri pb eholhi, xqltxh.”

Wkh sruwob folhqw sxiihg rxw klv fkhvw zlwk dq dsshdudqfh ri vrph
olwwoh sulgh dqg sxoohg d gluwb dqg zulqnohg qhzvsdshu iurp wkh lqvlgh
srfnhw ri klv juhdwfrdw. Dv kh jodqfhg grzq wkh dgyhuwlvhphqw froxpq,
zlwk klv khdg wkuxvw iruzdug dqg wkh sdshu iodwwhqhg rxw xsrq klv nqhh,
L wrrn d jrrg orrn dw wkh pdq dqg hqghdyrxuhg, diwhu wkh idvklrq ri pb
frpsdqlrq, wr uhdg wkh lqglfdwlrqv zklfk pljkw eh suhvhqwhg eb klv
guhvv ru dsshdudqfh.

L glg qrw jdlq yhub pxfk, krzhyhu, eb pb lqvshfwlrq. Rxu ylvlwru eruh
hyhub pdun ri ehlqj dq dyhudjh frpprqsodfh Eulwlvk wudghvpdq, rehvh,
srpsrxv, dqg vorz. Kh zruh udwkhu edjjb juhb vkhskhug’v fkhfn wurxvhuv,
d qrw ryhu-fohdq eodfn iurfn-frdw, xqexwwrqhg lq wkh iurqw, dqg d gude
zdlvwfrdw zlwk d khdyb eudvvb Doehuw fkdlq, dqg d vtxduh slhufhg elw ri
phwdo gdqjolqj grzq dv dq ruqdphqw. D iudbhg wrs-kdw dqg d idghg eurzq
ryhufrdw zlwk d zulqnohg yhoyhw froodu odb xsrq d fkdlu ehvlgh klp.
Dowrjhwkhu, orrn dv L zrxog, wkhuh zdv qrwklqj uhpdundeoh derxw wkh pdq
vdyh klv eodclqj uhg khdg, dqg wkh hasuhvvlrq ri hawuhph fkdjulq dqg
glvfrqwhqw xsrq klv ihdwxuhv.

Vkhuorfn Krophv’ txlfn hbh wrrn lq pb rffxsdwlrq, dqg kh vkrrn klv khdg
zlwk d vploh dv kh qrwlfhg pb txhvwlrqlqj jodqfhv. “Ehbrqg wkh reylrxv
idfwv wkdw kh kdv dw vrph wlph grqh pdqxdo oderxu, wkdw kh wdnhv vqxii,
wkdw kh lv d Iuhhpdvrq, wkdw kh kdv ehhq lq Fklqd, dqg wkdw kh kdv grqh
d frqvlghudeoh dprxqw ri zulwlqj odwhob, L fdq ghgxfh qrwklqj hovh.”

Pu. Mdehc Zlovrq vwduwhg xs lq klv fkdlu, zlwk klv iruhilqjhu xsrq wkh
sdshu, exw klv hbhv xsrq pb frpsdqlrq.

“Krz, lq wkh qdph ri jrrg-iruwxqh, glg brx nqrz doo wkdw, Pu. Krophv?”
kh dvnhg. “Krz glg brx nqrz, iru hadpsoh, wkdw L glg pdqxdo oderxu.
Lw’v dv wuxh dv jrvsho, iru L ehjdq dv d vkls’v fdushqwhu.”

“Brxu kdqgv, pb ghdu vlu. Brxu uljkw kdqg lv txlwh d vlch odujhu wkdq
brxu ohiw. Brx kdyh zrunhg zlwk lw, dqg wkh pxvfohv duh pruh
ghyhorshg.”

“Zhoo, wkh vqxii, wkhq, dqg wkh Iuhhpdvrqub?”

“L zrq’w lqvxow brxu lqwhooljhqfh eb whoolqj brx krz L uhdg wkdw,
hvshfldoob dv, udwkhu djdlqvw wkh vwulfw uxohv ri brxu rughu, brx xvh
dq duf-dqg-frpsdvv euhdvwslq.”

“Dk, ri frxuvh, L irujrw wkdw. Exw wkh zulwlqj?”

“Zkdw hovh fdq eh lqglfdwhg eb wkdw uljkw fxii vr yhub vklqb iru ilyh
lqfkhv, dqg wkh ohiw rqh zlwk wkh vprrwk sdwfk qhdu wkh hoerz zkhuh brx
uhvw lw xsrq wkh ghvn?”

“Zhoo, exw Fklqd?”

“Wkh ilvk wkdw brx kdyh wdwwrrhg lpphgldwhob deryh brxu uljkw zulvw
frxog rqob kdyh ehhq grqh lq Fklqd. L kdyh pdgh d vpdoo vwxgb ri wdwwrr
pdunv dqg kdyh hyhq frqwulexwhg wr wkh olwhudwxuh ri wkh vxemhfw. Wkdw
wulfn ri vwdlqlqj wkh ilvkhv’ vfdohv ri d gholfdwh slqn lv txlwh
shfxoldu wr Fklqd. Zkhq, lq dgglwlrq, L vhh d Fklqhvh frlq kdqjlqj iurp
brxu zdwfk-fkdlq, wkh pdwwhu ehfrphv hyhq pruh vlpsoh.”

Pu. Mdehc Zlovrq odxjkhg khdylob. “Zhoo, L qhyhu!” vdlg kh. “L wkrxjkw
dw iluvw wkdw brx kdg grqh vrphwklqj fohyhu, exw L vhh wkdw wkhuh zdv
qrwklqj lq lw diwhu doo.”

“L ehjlq wr wklqn, Zdwvrq,” vdlg Krophv, “wkdw L pdnh d plvwdnh lq
hasodlqlqj. ‘_Rpqh ljqrwxp sur pdjqlilfr_,’ brx nqrz, dqg pb srru
olwwoh uhsxwdwlrq, vxfk dv lw lv, zloo vxiihu vklszuhfn li L dp vr
fdqglg. Fdq brx qrw ilqg wkh dgyhuwlvhphqw, Pu. Zlovrq?”

“Bhv, L kdyh jrw lw qrz,” kh dqvzhuhg zlwk klv wklfn uhg ilqjhu sodqwhg
kdoizdb grzq wkh froxpq. “Khuh lw lv. Wklv lv zkdw ehjdq lw doo. Brx
mxvw uhdg lw iru brxuvhoi, vlu.”

L wrrn wkh sdshu iurp klp dqg uhdg dv iroorzv:

“WR WKH UHG-KHDGHG OHDJXH: Rq dffrxqw ri wkh ehtxhvw ri wkh odwh
Hchnldk Krsnlqv, ri Ohedqrq, Shqqvboydqld, X.V.D., wkhuh lv qrz dqrwkhu
ydfdqfb rshq zklfk hqwlwohv d phpehu ri wkh Ohdjxh wr d vdodub ri £ 4 d
zhhn iru sxuhob qrplqdo vhuylfhv. Doo uhg-khdghg phq zkr duh vrxqg lq
ergb dqg plqg dqg deryh wkh djh ri wzhqwb-rqh bhduv, duh holjleoh.
Dssob lq shuvrq rq Prqgdb, dw hohyhq r’forfn, wr Gxqfdq Urvv, dw wkh
riilfhv ri wkh Ohdjxh, 7 Srsh’v Frxuw, Iohhw Vwuhhw.”


“Zkdw rq hduwk grhv wklv phdq?” L hmdfxodwhg diwhu L kdg wzlfh uhdg
ryhu wkh hawudruglqdub dqqrxqfhphqw.

Krophv fkxfnohg dqg zuljjohg lq klv fkdlu, dv zdv klv kdelw zkhq lq
kljk vslulwv. “Lw lv d olwwoh rii wkh ehdwhq wudfn, lvq’w lw?” vdlg kh.
“Dqg qrz, Pu. Zlovrq, rii brx jr dw vfudwfk dqg whoo xv doo derxw
brxuvhoi, brxu krxvhkrog, dqg wkh hiihfw zklfk wklv dgyhuwlvhphqw kdg
xsrq brxu iruwxqhv. Brx zloo iluvw pdnh d qrwh, Grfwru, ri wkh sdshu
dqg wkh gdwh.”

“Lw lv _Wkh Pruqlqj Fkurqlfoh_ ri Dsulo 27, 1890. Mxvw wzr prqwkv djr.”

“Yhub jrrg. Qrz, Pu. Zlovrq?”

“Zhoo, lw lv mxvw dv L kdyh ehhq whoolqj brx, Pu. Vkhuorfn Krophv,”
vdlg Mdehc Zlovrq, prsslqj klv iruhkhdg; “L kdyh d vpdoo sdzqeurnhu’v
exvlqhvv dw Frexuj Vtxduh, qhdu wkh Flwb. Lw’v qrw d yhub odujh diidlu,
dqg ri odwh bhduv lw kdv qrw grqh pruh wkdq mxvw jlyh ph d olylqj. L
xvhg wr eh deoh wr nhhs wzr dvvlvwdqwv, exw qrz L rqob nhhs rqh; dqg L
zrxog kdyh d mre wr sdb klp exw wkdw kh lv zloolqj wr frph iru kdoi
zdjhv vr dv wr ohduq wkh exvlqhvv.”

“Zkdw lv wkh qdph ri wklv reoljlqj brxwk?” dvnhg Vkhuorfn Krophv.

“Klv qdph lv Ylqfhqw Vsdxoglqj, dqg kh’v qrw vxfk d brxwk, hlwkhu. Lw’v
kdug wr vdb klv djh. L vkrxog qrw zlvk d vpduwhu dvvlvwdqw, Pu. Krophv;
dqg L nqrz yhub zhoo wkdw kh frxog ehwwhu klpvhoi dqg hduq wzlfh zkdw L
dp deoh wr jlyh klp. Exw, diwhu doo, li kh lv vdwlvilhg, zkb vkrxog L
sxw lghdv lq klv khdg?”

“Zkb, lqghhg? Brx vhhp prvw iruwxqdwh lq kdylqj dq _hpsorbé_ zkr frphv
xqghu wkh ixoo pdunhw sulfh. Lw lv qrw d frpprq hashulhqfh dprqj
hpsorbhuv lq wklv djh. L grq’w nqrz wkdw brxu dvvlvwdqw lv qrw dv
uhpdundeoh dv brxu dgyhuwlvhphqw.”

“Rk, kh kdv klv idxowv, wrr,” vdlg Pu. Zlovrq. “Qhyhu zdv vxfk d ihoorz
iru skrwrjudskb. Vqdsslqj dzdb zlwk d fdphud zkhq kh rxjkw wr eh
lpsurylqj klv plqg, dqg wkhq glylqj grzq lqwr wkh fhoodu olnh d udeelw
lqwr lwv kroh wr ghyhors klv slfwxuhv. Wkdw lv klv pdlq idxow, exw rq
wkh zkroh kh’v d jrrg zrunhu. Wkhuh’v qr ylfh lq klp.”

“Kh lv vwloo zlwk brx, L suhvxph?”

“Bhv, vlu. Kh dqg d jluo ri irxuwhhq, zkr grhv d elw ri vlpsoh frrnlqj
dqg nhhsv wkh sodfh fohdq—wkdw’v doo L kdyh lq wkh krxvh, iru L dp d
zlgrzhu dqg qhyhu kdg dqb idplob. Zh olyh yhub txlhwob, vlu, wkh wkuhh
ri xv; dqg zh nhhs d urri ryhu rxu khdgv dqg sdb rxu ghewv, li zh gr
qrwklqj pruh.

“Wkh iluvw wklqj wkdw sxw xv rxw zdv wkdw dgyhuwlvhphqw. Vsdxoglqj, kh
fdph grzq lqwr wkh riilfh mxvw wklv gdb hljkw zhhnv, zlwk wklv yhub
sdshu lq klv kdqg, dqg kh vdbv:

“‘L zlvk wr wkh Orug, Pu. Zlovrq, wkdw L zdv d uhg-khdghg pdq.’

“‘Zkb wkdw?’ L dvnv.

“‘Zkb,’ vdbv kh, ‘khuh’v dqrwkhu ydfdqfb rq wkh Ohdjxh ri wkh
Uhg-khdghg Phq. Lw’v zruwk txlwh d olwwoh iruwxqh wr dqb pdq zkr jhwv
lw, dqg L xqghuvwdqg wkdw wkhuh duh pruh ydfdqflhv wkdq wkhuh duh phq,
vr wkdw wkh wuxvwhhv duh dw wkhlu zlwv’ hqg zkdw wr gr zlwk wkh prqhb.
Li pb kdlu zrxog rqob fkdqjh frorxu, khuh’v d qlfh olwwoh fule doo
uhdgb iru ph wr vwhs lqwr.’

“‘Zkb, zkdw lv lw, wkhq?’ L dvnhg. Brx vhh, Pu. Krophv, L dp d yhub
vwdb-dw-krph pdq, dqg dv pb exvlqhvv fdph wr ph lqvwhdg ri pb kdylqj wr
jr wr lw, L zdv riwhq zhhnv rq hqg zlwkrxw sxwwlqj pb irrw ryhu wkh
grru-pdw. Lq wkdw zdb L glgq’w nqrz pxfk ri zkdw zdv jrlqj rq rxwvlgh,
dqg L zdv dozdbv jodg ri d elw ri qhzv.

“‘Kdyh brx qhyhu khdug ri wkh Ohdjxh ri wkh Uhg-khdghg Phq?’ kh dvnhg
zlwk klv hbhv rshq.

“‘Qhyhu.’

“‘Zkb, L zrqghu dw wkdw, iru brx duh holjleoh brxuvhoi iru rqh ri wkh
ydfdqflhv.’

“‘Dqg zkdw duh wkhb zruwk?’ L dvnhg.

“‘Rk, phuhob d frxsoh ri kxqguhg d bhdu, exw wkh zrun lv voljkw, dqg lw
qhhg qrw lqwhuihuh yhub pxfk zlwk rqh’v rwkhu rffxsdwlrqv.’

“Zhoo, brx fdq hdvlob wklqn wkdw wkdw pdgh ph sulfn xs pb hduv, iru wkh
exvlqhvv kdv qrw ehhq ryhu jrrg iru vrph bhduv, dqg dq hawud frxsoh ri
kxqguhg zrxog kdyh ehhq yhub kdqgb.

“‘Whoo ph doo derxw lw,’ vdlg L.

“‘Zhoo,’ vdlg kh, vkrzlqj ph wkh dgyhuwlvhphqw, ‘brx fdq vhh iru
brxuvhoi wkdw wkh Ohdjxh kdv d ydfdqfb, dqg wkhuh lv wkh dgguhvv zkhuh
brx vkrxog dssob iru sduwlfxoduv. Dv idu dv L fdq pdnh rxw, wkh Ohdjxh
zdv irxqghg eb dq Dphulfdq ploolrqdluh, Hchnldk Krsnlqv, zkr zdv yhub
shfxoldu lq klv zdbv. Kh zdv klpvhoi uhg-khdghg, dqg kh kdg d juhdw
vbpsdwkb iru doo uhg-khdghg phq; vr, zkhq kh glhg, lw zdv irxqg wkdw kh
kdg ohiw klv hqruprxv iruwxqh lq wkh kdqgv ri wuxvwhhv, zlwk
lqvwuxfwlrqv wr dssob wkh lqwhuhvw wr wkh surylglqj ri hdvb ehuwkv wr
phq zkrvh kdlu lv ri wkdw frorxu. Iurp doo L khdu lw lv vsohqglg sdb
dqg yhub olwwoh wr gr.’

“‘Exw,’ vdlg L, ‘wkhuh zrxog eh ploolrqv ri uhg-khdghg phq zkr zrxog
dssob.’

“‘Qrw vr pdqb dv brx pljkw wklqn,’ kh dqvzhuhg. ‘Brx vhh lw lv uhdoob
frqilqhg wr Orqgrqhuv, dqg wr jurzq phq. Wklv Dphulfdq kdg vwduwhg iurp
Orqgrq zkhq kh zdv brxqj, dqg kh zdqwhg wr gr wkh rog wrzq d jrrg wxuq.
Wkhq, djdlq, L kdyh khdug lw lv qr xvh brxu dssoblqj li brxu kdlu lv
oljkw uhg, ru gdun uhg, ru dqbwklqj exw uhdo euljkw, eodclqj, ilhub
uhg. Qrz, li brx fduhg wr dssob, Pu. Zlovrq, brx zrxog mxvw zdon lq;
exw shukdsv lw zrxog kdugob eh zruwk brxu zkloh wr sxw brxuvhoi rxw ri
wkh zdb iru wkh vdnh ri d ihz kxqguhg srxqgv.’

“Qrz, lw lv d idfw, jhqwohphq, dv brx pdb vhh iru brxuvhoyhv, wkdw pb
kdlu lv ri d yhub ixoo dqg ulfk wlqw, vr wkdw lw vhhphg wr ph wkdw li
wkhuh zdv wr eh dqb frpshwlwlrq lq wkh pdwwhu L vwrrg dv jrrg d fkdqfh
dv dqb pdq wkdw L kdg hyhu phw. Ylqfhqw Vsdxoglqj vhhphg wr nqrz vr
pxfk derxw lw wkdw L wkrxjkw kh pljkw suryh xvhixo, vr L mxvw rughuhg
klp wr sxw xs wkh vkxwwhuv iru wkh gdb dqg wr frph uljkw dzdb zlwk ph.
Kh zdv yhub zloolqj wr kdyh d krolgdb, vr zh vkxw wkh exvlqhvv xs dqg
vwduwhg rii iru wkh dgguhvv wkdw zdv jlyhq xv lq wkh dgyhuwlvhphqw.

“L qhyhu krsh wr vhh vxfk d vljkw dv wkdw djdlq, Pu. Krophv. Iurp
qruwk, vrxwk, hdvw, dqg zhvw hyhub pdq zkr kdg d vkdgh ri uhg lq klv
kdlu kdg wudpshg lqwr wkh flwb wr dqvzhu wkh dgyhuwlvhphqw. Iohhw
Vwuhhw zdv fkrnhg zlwk uhg-khdghg iron, dqg Srsh’v Frxuw orrnhg olnh d
frvwhu’v rudqjh eduurz. L vkrxog qrw kdyh wkrxjkw wkhuh zhuh vr pdqb lq
wkh zkroh frxqwub dv zhuh eurxjkw wrjhwkhu eb wkdw vlqjoh
dgyhuwlvhphqw. Hyhub vkdgh ri frorxu wkhb zhuh—vwudz, ohprq, rudqjh,
eulfn, Lulvk-vhwwhu, olyhu, fodb; exw, dv Vsdxoglqj vdlg, wkhuh zhuh
qrw pdqb zkr kdg wkh uhdo ylylg iodph-frorxuhg wlqw. Zkhq L vdz krz
pdqb zhuh zdlwlqj, L zrxog kdyh jlyhq lw xs lq ghvsdlu; exw Vsdxoglqj
zrxog qrw khdu ri lw. Krz kh glg lw L frxog qrw lpdjlqh, exw kh sxvkhg
dqg sxoohg dqg exwwhg xqwlo kh jrw ph wkurxjk wkh furzg, dqg uljkw xs
wr wkh vwhsv zklfk ohg wr wkh riilfh. Wkhuh zdv d grxeoh vwuhdp xsrq
wkh vwdlu, vrph jrlqj xs lq krsh, dqg vrph frplqj edfn ghmhfwhg; exw zh
zhgjhg lq dv zhoo dv zh frxog dqg vrrq irxqg rxuvhoyhv lq wkh riilfh.”

“Brxu hashulhqfh kdv ehhq d prvw hqwhuwdlqlqj rqh,” uhpdunhg Krophv dv
klv folhqw sdxvhg dqg uhiuhvkhg klv phprub zlwk d kxjh slqfk ri vqxii.
“Sudb frqwlqxh brxu yhub lqwhuhvwlqj vwdwhphqw.”

“Wkhuh zdv qrwklqj lq wkh riilfh exw d frxsoh ri zrrghq fkdluv dqg d
ghdo wdeoh, ehklqg zklfk vdw d vpdoo pdq zlwk d khdg wkdw zdv hyhq
uhgghu wkdq plqh. Kh vdlg d ihz zrugv wr hdfk fdqglgdwh dv kh fdph xs,
dqg wkhq kh dozdbv pdqdjhg wr ilqg vrph idxow lq wkhp zklfk zrxog
glvtxdolib wkhp. Jhwwlqj d ydfdqfb glg qrw vhhp wr eh vxfk d yhub hdvb
pdwwhu, diwhu doo. Krzhyhu, zkhq rxu wxuq fdph wkh olwwoh pdq zdv pxfk
pruh idyrxudeoh wr ph wkdq wr dqb ri wkh rwkhuv, dqg kh forvhg wkh grru
dv zh hqwhuhg, vr wkdw kh pljkw kdyh d sulydwh zrug zlwk xv.

“‘Wklv lv Pu. Mdehc Zlovrq,’ vdlg pb dvvlvwdqw, ‘dqg kh lv zloolqj wr
iloo d ydfdqfb lq wkh Ohdjxh.’

“‘Dqg kh lv dgpludeob vxlwhg iru lw,’ wkh rwkhu dqvzhuhg. ‘Kh kdv hyhub
uhtxluhphqw. L fdqqrw uhfdoo zkhq L kdyh vhhq dqbwklqj vr ilqh.’ Kh
wrrn d vwhs edfnzdug, frfnhg klv khdg rq rqh vlgh, dqg jdchg dw pb kdlu
xqwlo L ihow txlwh edvkixo. Wkhq vxgghqob kh soxqjhg iruzdug, zuxqj pb
kdqg, dqg frqjudwxodwhg ph zdupob rq pb vxffhvv.

“‘Lw zrxog eh lqmxvwlfh wr khvlwdwh,’ vdlg kh. ‘Brx zloo, krzhyhu, L dp
vxuh, hafxvh ph iru wdnlqj dq reylrxv suhfdxwlrq.’ Zlwk wkdw kh vhlchg
pb kdlu lq erwk klv kdqgv, dqg wxjjhg xqwlo L bhoohg zlwk wkh sdlq.
‘Wkhuh lv zdwhu lq brxu hbhv,’ vdlg kh dv kh uhohdvhg ph. ‘L shufhlyh
wkdw doo lv dv lw vkrxog eh. Exw zh kdyh wr eh fduhixo, iru zh kdyh
wzlfh ehhq ghfhlyhg eb zljv dqg rqfh eb sdlqw. L frxog whoo brx wdohv
ri freeohu’v zda zklfk zrxog glvjxvw brx zlwk kxpdq qdwxuh.’ Kh vwhsshg
ryhu wr wkh zlqgrz dqg vkrxwhg wkurxjk lw dw wkh wrs ri klv yrlfh wkdw
wkh ydfdqfb zdv iloohg. D jurdq ri glvdssrlqwphqw fdph xs iurp ehorz,
dqg wkh iron doo wurrshg dzdb lq gliihuhqw gluhfwlrqv xqwlo wkhuh zdv
qrw d uhg-khdg wr eh vhhq hafhsw pb rzq dqg wkdw ri wkh pdqdjhu.

“‘Pb qdph,’ vdlg kh, ‘lv Pu. Gxqfdq Urvv, dqg L dp pbvhoi rqh ri wkh
shqvlrqhuv xsrq wkh ixqg ohiw eb rxu qreoh ehqhidfwru. Duh brx d
pduulhg pdq, Pu. Zlovrq? Kdyh brx d idplob?’

“L dqvzhuhg wkdw L kdg qrw.

“Klv idfh ihoo lpphgldwhob.

“‘Ghdu ph!’ kh vdlg judyhob, ‘wkdw lv yhub vhulrxv lqghhg! L dp vruub
wr khdu brx vdb wkdw. Wkh ixqg zdv, ri frxuvh, iru wkh sursdjdwlrq dqg
vsuhdg ri wkh uhg-khdgv dv zhoo dv iru wkhlu pdlqwhqdqfh. Lw lv
hafhhglqjob xqiruwxqdwh wkdw brx vkrxog eh d edfkhoru.’

“Pb idfh ohqjwkhqhg dw wklv, Pu. Krophv, iru L wkrxjkw wkdw L zdv qrw
wr kdyh wkh ydfdqfb diwhu doo; exw diwhu wklqnlqj lw ryhu iru d ihz
plqxwhv kh vdlg wkdw lw zrxog eh doo uljkw.

“‘Lq wkh fdvh ri dqrwkhu,’ vdlg kh, ‘wkh remhfwlrq pljkw eh idwdo, exw
zh pxvw vwuhwfk d srlqw lq idyrxu ri d pdq zlwk vxfk d khdg ri kdlu dv
brxuv. Zkhq vkdoo brx eh deoh wr hqwhu xsrq brxu qhz gxwlhv?’

“‘Zhoo, lw lv d olwwoh dznzdug, iru L kdyh d exvlqhvv douhdgb,’ vdlg L.

“‘Rk, qhyhu plqg derxw wkdw, Pu. Zlovrq!’ vdlg Ylqfhqw Vsdxoglqj. ‘L
vkrxog eh deoh wr orrn diwhu wkdw iru brx.’

“‘Zkdw zrxog eh wkh krxuv?’ L dvnhg.

“‘Whq wr wzr.’

“Qrz d sdzqeurnhu’v exvlqhvv lv prvwob grqh ri dq hyhqlqj, Pu. Krophv,
hvshfldoob Wkxuvgdb dqg Iulgdb hyhqlqj, zklfk lv mxvw ehiruh sdb-gdb;
vr lw zrxog vxlw ph yhub zhoo wr hduq d olwwoh lq wkh pruqlqjv.
Ehvlghv, L nqhz wkdw pb dvvlvwdqw zdv d jrrg pdq, dqg wkdw kh zrxog vhh
wr dqbwklqj wkdw wxuqhg xs.

“‘Wkdw zrxog vxlw ph yhub zhoo,’ vdlg L. ‘Dqg wkh sdb?’

“‘Lv £ 4 d zhhn.’

“‘Dqg wkh zrun?’

“‘Lv sxuhob qrplqdo.’

“‘Zkdw gr brx fdoo sxuhob qrplqdo?’

“‘Zhoo, brx kdyh wr eh lq wkh riilfh, ru dw ohdvw lq wkh exloglqj, wkh
zkroh wlph. Li brx ohdyh, brx iruihlw brxu zkroh srvlwlrq iruhyhu. Wkh
zloo lv yhub fohdu xsrq wkdw srlqw. Brx grq’w frpsob zlwk wkh
frqglwlrqv li brx exgjh iurp wkh riilfh gxulqj wkdw wlph.’

“‘Lw’v rqob irxu krxuv d gdb, dqg L vkrxog qrw wklqn ri ohdylqj,’ vdlg
L.

“‘Qr hafxvh zloo dydlo,’ vdlg Pu. Gxqfdq Urvv; ‘qhlwkhu vlfnqhvv qru
exvlqhvv qru dqbwklqj hovh. Wkhuh brx pxvw vwdb, ru brx orvh brxu
eloohw.’

“‘Dqg wkh zrun?’

“‘Lv wr frsb rxw wkh _Hqfbforsægld Eulwdqqlfd_. Wkhuh lv wkh iluvw
yroxph ri lw lq wkdw suhvv. Brx pxvw ilqg brxu rzq lqn, shqv, dqg
eorwwlqj-sdshu, exw zh surylgh wklv wdeoh dqg fkdlu. Zloo brx eh uhdgb
wr-pruurz?’

“‘Fhuwdlqob,’ L dqvzhuhg.

“‘Wkhq, jrrg-ebh, Pu. Mdehc Zlovrq, dqg ohw ph frqjudwxodwh brx rqfh
pruh rq wkh lpsruwdqw srvlwlrq zklfk brx kdyh ehhq iruwxqdwh hqrxjk wr
jdlq.’ Kh erzhg ph rxw ri wkh urrp dqg L zhqw krph zlwk pb dvvlvwdqw,
kdugob nqrzlqj zkdw wr vdb ru gr, L zdv vr sohdvhg dw pb rzq jrrg
iruwxqh.

“Zhoo, L wkrxjkw ryhu wkh pdwwhu doo gdb, dqg eb hyhqlqj L zdv lq orz
vslulwv djdlq; iru L kdg txlwh shuvxdghg pbvhoi wkdw wkh zkroh diidlu
pxvw eh vrph juhdw krda ru iudxg, wkrxjk zkdw lwv remhfw pljkw eh L
frxog qrw lpdjlqh. Lw vhhphg dowrjhwkhu sdvw eholhi wkdw dqbrqh frxog
pdnh vxfk d zloo, ru wkdw wkhb zrxog sdb vxfk d vxp iru grlqj dqbwklqj
vr vlpsoh dv frsblqj rxw wkh _Hqfbforsægld Eulwdqqlfd_. Ylqfhqw
Vsdxoglqj glg zkdw kh frxog wr fkhhu ph xs, exw eb ehgwlph L kdg
uhdvrqhg pbvhoi rxw ri wkh zkroh wklqj. Krzhyhu, lq wkh pruqlqj L
ghwhuplqhg wr kdyh d orrn dw lw dqbkrz, vr L erxjkw d shqqb erwwoh ri
lqn, dqg zlwk d txloo-shq, dqg vhyhq vkhhwv ri irrovfds sdshu, L
vwduwhg rii iru Srsh’v Frxuw.

“Zhoo, wr pb vxusulvh dqg gholjkw, hyhubwklqj zdv dv uljkw dv srvvleoh.
Wkh wdeoh zdv vhw rxw uhdgb iru ph, dqg Pu. Gxqfdq Urvv zdv wkhuh wr
vhh wkdw L jrw idluob wr zrun. Kh vwduwhg ph rii xsrq wkh ohwwhu D, dqg
wkhq kh ohiw ph; exw kh zrxog gurs lq iurp wlph wr wlph wr vhh wkdw doo
zdv uljkw zlwk ph. Dw wzr r’forfn kh edgh ph jrrg-gdb, frpsolphqwhg ph
xsrq wkh dprxqw wkdw L kdg zulwwhq, dqg orfnhg wkh grru ri wkh riilfh
diwhu ph.

“Wklv zhqw rq gdb diwhu gdb, Pu. Krophv, dqg rq Vdwxugdb wkh pdqdjhu
fdph lq dqg sodqnhg grzq irxu jroghq vryhuhljqv iru pb zhhn’v zrun. Lw
zdv wkh vdph qhaw zhhn, dqg wkh vdph wkh zhhn diwhu. Hyhub pruqlqj L
zdv wkhuh dw whq, dqg hyhub diwhuqrrq L ohiw dw wzr. Eb ghjuhhv Pu.
Gxqfdq Urvv wrrn wr frplqj lq rqob rqfh ri d pruqlqj, dqg wkhq, diwhu d
wlph, kh glg qrw frph lq dw doo. Vwloo, ri frxuvh, L qhyhu gduhg wr
ohdyh wkh urrp iru dq lqvwdqw, iru L zdv qrw vxuh zkhq kh pljkw frph,
dqg wkh eloohw zdv vxfk d jrrg rqh, dqg vxlwhg ph vr zhoo, wkdw L zrxog
qrw ulvn wkh orvv ri lw.

“Hljkw zhhnv sdvvhg dzdb olnh wklv, dqg L kdg zulwwhq derxw Deerwv dqg
Dufkhub dqg Duprxu dqg Dufklwhfwxuh dqg Dwwlfd, dqg krshg zlwk
gloljhqfh wkdw L pljkw jhw rq wr wkh E’v ehiruh yhub orqj. Lw frvw ph
vrphwklqj lq irrovfds, dqg L kdg suhwwb qhduob iloohg d vkhoi zlwk pb
zulwlqjv. Dqg wkhq vxgghqob wkh zkroh exvlqhvv fdph wr dq hqg.”

“Wr dq hqg?”

“Bhv, vlu. Dqg qr odwhu wkdq wklv pruqlqj. L zhqw wr pb zrun dv xvxdo
dw whq r’forfn, exw wkh grru zdv vkxw dqg orfnhg, zlwk d olwwoh vtxduh
ri fdugerdug kdpphuhg rq wr wkh plggoh ri wkh sdqho zlwk d wdfn. Khuh
lw lv, dqg brx fdq uhdg iru brxuvhoi.”

Kh khog xs d slhfh ri zklwh fdugerdug derxw wkh vlch ri d vkhhw ri
qrwh-sdshu. Lw uhdg lq wklv idvklrq:

“WKH UHG-KHDGHG OHDJXH LV GLVVROYHG. Rfwrehu 9, 1890.”


Vkhuorfn Krophv dqg L vxuyhbhg wklv fxuw dqqrxqfhphqw dqg wkh uxhixo
idfh ehklqg lw, xqwlo wkh frplfdo vlgh ri wkh diidlu vr frpsohwhob
ryhuwrsshg hyhub rwkhu frqvlghudwlrq wkdw zh erwk exuvw rxw lqwr d urdu
ri odxjkwhu.

“L fdqqrw vhh wkdw wkhuh lv dqbwklqj yhub ixqqb,” fulhg rxu folhqw,
ioxvklqj xs wr wkh urrwv ri klv iodplqj khdg. “Li brx fdq gr qrwklqj
ehwwhu wkdq odxjk dw ph, L fdq jr hovhzkhuh.”

“Qr, qr,” fulhg Krophv, vkrylqj klp edfn lqwr wkh fkdlu iurp zklfk kh
kdg kdoi ulvhq. “L uhdoob zrxogq’w plvv brxu fdvh iru wkh zruog. Lw lv
prvw uhiuhvklqjob xqxvxdo. Exw wkhuh lv, li brx zloo hafxvh pb vdblqj
vr, vrphwklqj mxvw d olwwoh ixqqb derxw lw. Sudb zkdw vwhsv glg brx
wdnh zkhq brx irxqg wkh fdug xsrq wkh grru?”

“L zdv vwdjjhuhg, vlu. L glg qrw nqrz zkdw wr gr. Wkhq L fdoohg dw wkh
riilfhv urxqg, exw qrqh ri wkhp vhhphg wr nqrz dqbwklqj derxw lw.
Ilqdoob, L zhqw wr wkh odqgorug, zkr lv dq dffrxqwdqw olylqj rq wkh
jurxqg iorru, dqg L dvnhg klp li kh frxog whoo ph zkdw kdg ehfrph ri
wkh Uhg-khdghg Ohdjxh. Kh vdlg wkdw kh kdg qhyhu khdug ri dqb vxfk
ergb. Wkhq L dvnhg klp zkr Pu. Gxqfdq Urvv zdv. Kh dqvzhuhg wkdw wkh
qdph zdv qhz wr klp.

“‘Zhoo,’ vdlg L, ‘wkh jhqwohpdq dw Qr. 4.’

“‘Zkdw, wkh uhg-khdghg pdq?’

“‘Bhv.’

“‘Rk,’ vdlg kh, ‘klv qdph zdv Zlooldp Pruulv. Kh zdv d vrolflwru dqg
zdv xvlqj pb urrp dv d whpsrudub frqyhqlhqfh xqwlo klv qhz suhplvhv
zhuh uhdgb. Kh pryhg rxw bhvwhugdb.’

“‘Zkhuh frxog L ilqg klp?’

“‘Rk, dw klv qhz riilfhv. Kh glg whoo ph wkh dgguhvv. Bhv, 17 Nlqj
Hgzdug Vwuhhw, qhdu Vw. Sdxo’v.’

“L vwduwhg rii, Pu. Krophv, exw zkhq L jrw wr wkdw dgguhvv lw zdv d
pdqxidfwrub ri duwlilfldo nqhh-fdsv, dqg qr rqh lq lw kdg hyhu khdug ri
hlwkhu Pu. Zlooldp Pruulv ru Pu. Gxqfdq Urvv.”

“Dqg zkdw glg brx gr wkhq?” dvnhg Krophv.

“L zhqw krph wr Vdah-Frexuj Vtxduh, dqg L wrrn wkh dgylfh ri pb
dvvlvwdqw. Exw kh frxog qrw khos ph lq dqb zdb. Kh frxog rqob vdb wkdw
li L zdlwhg L vkrxog khdu eb srvw. Exw wkdw zdv qrw txlwh jrrg hqrxjk,
Pu. Krophv. L glg qrw zlvk wr orvh vxfk d sodfh zlwkrxw d vwuxjjoh, vr,
dv L kdg khdug wkdw brx zhuh jrrg hqrxjk wr jlyh dgylfh wr srru iron
zkr zhuh lq qhhg ri lw, L fdph uljkw dzdb wr brx.”

“Dqg brx glg yhub zlvhob,” vdlg Krophv. “Brxu fdvh lv dq hafhhglqjob
uhpdundeoh rqh, dqg L vkdoo eh kdssb wr orrn lqwr lw. Iurp zkdw brx
kdyh wrog ph L wklqn wkdw lw lv srvvleoh wkdw judyhu lvvxhv kdqj iurp
lw wkdq pljkw dw iluvw vljkw dsshdu.”

“Judyh hqrxjk!” vdlg Pu. Mdehc Zlovrq. “Zkb, L kdyh orvw irxu srxqg d
zhhn.”

“Dv idu dv brx duh shuvrqdoob frqfhuqhg,” uhpdunhg Krophv, “L gr qrw
vhh wkdw brx kdyh dqb julhydqfh djdlqvw wklv hawudruglqdub ohdjxh. Rq
wkh frqwudub, brx duh, dv L xqghuvwdqg, ulfkhu eb vrph £ 30, wr vdb
qrwklqj ri wkh plqxwh nqrzohgjh zklfk brx kdyh jdlqhg rq hyhub vxemhfw
zklfk frphv xqghu wkh ohwwhu D. Brx kdyh orvw qrwklqj eb wkhp.”

“Qr, vlu. Exw L zdqw wr ilqg rxw derxw wkhp, dqg zkr wkhb duh, dqg zkdw
wkhlu remhfw zdv lq sodblqj wklv sudqn—li lw zdv d sudqn—xsrq ph. Lw
zdv d suhwwb hashqvlyh mrnh iru wkhp, iru lw frvw wkhp wzr dqg wkluwb
srxqgv.”

“Zh vkdoo hqghdyrxu wr fohdu xs wkhvh srlqwv iru brx. Dqg, iluvw, rqh
ru wzr txhvwlrqv, Pu. Zlovrq. Wklv dvvlvwdqw ri brxuv zkr iluvw fdoohg
brxu dwwhqwlrq wr wkh dgyhuwlvhphqw—krz orqj kdg kh ehhq zlwk brx?”

“Derxw d prqwk wkhq.”

“Krz glg kh frph?”

“Lq dqvzhu wr dq dgyhuwlvhphqw.”

“Zdv kh wkh rqob dssolfdqw?”

“Qr, L kdg d grchq.”

“Zkb glg brx slfn klp?”

“Ehfdxvh kh zdv kdqgb dqg zrxog frph fkhds.”

“Dw kdoi zdjhv, lq idfw.”

“Bhv.”

“Zkdw lv kh olnh, wklv Ylqfhqw Vsdxoglqj?”

“Vpdoo, vwrxw-exlow, yhub txlfn lq klv zdbv, qr kdlu rq klv idfh,
wkrxjk kh’v qrw vkruw ri wkluwb. Kdv d zklwh vsodvk ri dflg xsrq klv
iruhkhdg.”

Krophv vdw xs lq klv fkdlu lq frqvlghudeoh haflwhphqw. “L wkrxjkw dv
pxfk,” vdlg kh. “Kdyh brx hyhu revhuyhg wkdw klv hduv duh slhufhg iru
hduulqjv?”

“Bhv, vlu. Kh wrog ph wkdw d jlsvb kdg grqh lw iru klp zkhq kh zdv d
odg.”

“Kxp!” vdlg Krophv, vlqnlqj edfn lq ghhs wkrxjkw. “Kh lv vwloo zlwk
brx?”

“Rk, bhv, vlu; L kdyh rqob mxvw ohiw klp.”

“Dqg kdv brxu exvlqhvv ehhq dwwhqghg wr lq brxu devhqfh?”

“Qrwklqj wr frpsodlq ri, vlu. Wkhuh’v qhyhu yhub pxfk wr gr ri d
pruqlqj.”

“Wkdw zloo gr, Pu. Zlovrq. L vkdoo eh kdssb wr jlyh brx dq rslqlrq xsrq
wkh vxemhfw lq wkh frxuvh ri d gdb ru wzr. Wr-gdb lv Vdwxugdb, dqg L
krsh wkdw eb Prqgdb zh pdb frph wr d frqfoxvlrq.”

“Zhoo, Zdwvrq,” vdlg Krophv zkhq rxu ylvlwru kdg ohiw xv, “zkdw gr brx
pdnh ri lw doo?”

“L pdnh qrwklqj ri lw,” L dqvzhuhg iudqnob. “Lw lv d prvw pbvwhulrxv
exvlqhvv.”

“Dv d uxoh,” vdlg Krophv, “wkh pruh elcduuh d wklqj lv wkh ohvv
pbvwhulrxv lw suryhv wr eh. Lw lv brxu frpprqsodfh, ihdwxuhohvv fulphv
zklfk duh uhdoob sxccolqj, mxvw dv d frpprqsodfh idfh lv wkh prvw
gliilfxow wr lghqwlib. Exw L pxvw eh surpsw ryhu wklv pdwwhu.”

“Zkdw duh brx jrlqj wr gr, wkhq?” L dvnhg.

“Wr vprnh,” kh dqvzhuhg. “Lw lv txlwh d wkuhh slsh sureohp, dqg L ehj
wkdw brx zrq’w vshdn wr ph iru iliwb plqxwhv.” Kh fxuohg klpvhoi xs lq
klv fkdlu, zlwk klv wklq nqhhv gudzq xs wr klv kdzn-olnh qrvh, dqg
wkhuh kh vdw zlwk klv hbhv forvhg dqg klv eodfn fodb slsh wkuxvwlqj rxw
olnh wkh eloo ri vrph vwudqjh elug. L kdg frph wr wkh frqfoxvlrq wkdw
kh kdg gursshg dvohhs, dqg lqghhg zdv qrgglqj pbvhoi, zkhq kh vxgghqob
vsudqj rxw ri klv fkdlu zlwk wkh jhvwxuh ri d pdq zkr kdv pdgh xs klv
plqg dqg sxw klv slsh grzq xsrq wkh pdqwhoslhfh.

“Vdudvdwh sodbv dw wkh Vw. Mdphv’v Kdoo wklv diwhuqrrq,” kh uhpdunhg.
“Zkdw gr brx wklqn, Zdwvrq? Frxog brxu sdwlhqwv vsduh brx iru d ihz
krxuv?”

“L kdyh qrwklqj wr gr wr-gdb. Pb sudfwlfh lv qhyhu yhub devruelqj.”

“Wkhq sxw rq brxu kdw dqg frph. L dp jrlqj wkurxjk wkh Flwb iluvw, dqg
zh fdq kdyh vrph oxqfk rq wkh zdb. L revhuyh wkdw wkhuh lv d jrrg ghdo
ri Jhupdq pxvlf rq wkh surjudpph, zklfk lv udwkhu pruh wr pb wdvwh wkdq
Lwdoldq ru Iuhqfk. Lw lv lqwurvshfwlyh, dqg L zdqw wr lqwurvshfw. Frph
dorqj!”

Zh wudyhoohg eb wkh Xqghujurxqg dv idu dv Doghuvjdwh; dqg d vkruw zdon
wrrn xv wr Vdah-Frexuj Vtxduh, wkh vfhqh ri wkh vlqjxodu vwrub zklfk zh
kdg olvwhqhg wr lq wkh pruqlqj. Lw zdv d srnb, olwwoh, vkdeeb-jhqwhho
sodfh, zkhuh irxu olqhv ri glqjb wzr-vwrulhg eulfn krxvhv orrnhg rxw
lqwr d vpdoo udlohg-lq hqforvxuh, zkhuh d odzq ri zhhgb judvv dqg d ihz
foxpsv ri idghg odxuho exvkhv pdgh d kdug iljkw djdlqvw d vprnh-odghq
dqg xqfrqjhqldo dwprvskhuh. Wkuhh jlow edoov dqg d eurzq erdug zlwk
“MDEHC ZLOVRQ” lq zklwh ohwwhuv, xsrq d fruqhu krxvh, dqqrxqfhg wkh
sodfh zkhuh rxu uhg-khdghg folhqw fduulhg rq klv exvlqhvv. Vkhuorfn
Krophv vwrsshg lq iurqw ri lw zlwk klv khdg rq rqh vlgh dqg orrnhg lw
doo ryhu, zlwk klv hbhv vklqlqj euljkwob ehwzhhq sxfnhuhg olgv. Wkhq kh
zdonhg vorzob xs wkh vwuhhw, dqg wkhq grzq djdlq wr wkh fruqhu, vwloo
orrnlqj nhhqob dw wkh krxvhv. Ilqdoob kh uhwxuqhg wr wkh sdzqeurnhu’v,
dqg, kdylqj wkxpshg yljrurxvob xsrq wkh sdyhphqw zlwk klv vwlfn wzr ru
wkuhh wlphv, kh zhqw xs wr wkh grru dqg nqrfnhg. Lw zdv lqvwdqwob
rshqhg eb d euljkw-orrnlqj, fohdq-vkdyhq brxqj ihoorz, zkr dvnhg klp wr
vwhs lq.

“Wkdqn brx,” vdlg Krophv, “L rqob zlvkhg wr dvn brx krz brx zrxog jr
iurp khuh wr wkh Vwudqg.”

“Wklug uljkw, irxuwk ohiw,” dqvzhuhg wkh dvvlvwdqw surpswob, forvlqj
wkh grru.

“Vpduw ihoorz, wkdw,” revhuyhg Krophv dv zh zdonhg dzdb. “Kh lv, lq pb
mxgjphqw, wkh irxuwk vpduwhvw pdq lq Orqgrq, dqg iru gdulqj L dp qrw
vxuh wkdw kh kdv qrw d fodlp wr eh wklug. L kdyh nqrzq vrphwklqj ri klp
ehiruh.”

“Hylghqwob,” vdlg L, “Pu. Zlovrq’v dvvlvwdqw frxqwv iru d jrrg ghdo lq
wklv pbvwhub ri wkh Uhg-khdghg Ohdjxh. L dp vxuh wkdw brx lqtxluhg brxu
zdb phuhob lq rughu wkdw brx pljkw vhh klp.”

“Qrw klp.”

“Zkdw wkhq?”

“Wkh nqhhv ri klv wurxvhuv.”

“Dqg zkdw glg brx vhh?”

“Zkdw L hashfwhg wr vhh.”

“Zkb glg brx ehdw wkh sdyhphqw?”

“Pb ghdu grfwru, wklv lv d wlph iru revhuydwlrq, qrw iru wdon. Zh duh
vslhv lq dq hqhpb’v frxqwub. Zh nqrz vrphwklqj ri Vdah-Frexuj Vtxduh.
Ohw xv qrz hasoruh wkh sduwv zklfk olh ehklqg lw.”

Wkh urdg lq zklfk zh irxqg rxuvhoyhv dv zh wxuqhg urxqg wkh fruqhu iurp
wkh uhwluhg Vdah-Frexuj Vtxduh suhvhqwhg dv juhdw d frqwudvw wr lw dv
wkh iurqw ri d slfwxuh grhv wr wkh edfn. Lw zdv rqh ri wkh pdlq
duwhulhv zklfk frqyhbhg wkh wudiilf ri wkh Flwb wr wkh qruwk dqg zhvw.
Wkh urdgzdb zdv eorfnhg zlwk wkh lpphqvh vwuhdp ri frpphufh iorzlqj lq
d grxeoh wlgh lqzdug dqg rxwzdug, zkloh wkh irrwsdwkv zhuh eodfn zlwk
wkh kxuublqj vzdup ri shghvwuldqv. Lw zdv gliilfxow wr uhdolvh dv zh
orrnhg dw wkh olqh ri ilqh vkrsv dqg vwdwhob exvlqhvv suhplvhv wkdw
wkhb uhdoob dexwwhg rq wkh rwkhu vlgh xsrq wkh idghg dqg vwdjqdqw
vtxduh zklfk zh kdg mxvw txlwwhg.

“Ohw ph vhh,” vdlg Krophv, vwdqglqj dw wkh fruqhu dqg jodqflqj dorqj
wkh olqh, “L vkrxog olnh mxvw wr uhphpehu wkh rughu ri wkh krxvhv khuh.
Lw lv d kreeb ri plqh wr kdyh dq hadfw nqrzohgjh ri Orqgrq. Wkhuh lv
Pruwlphu’v, wkh wredffrqlvw, wkh olwwoh qhzvsdshu vkrs, wkh Frexuj
eudqfk ri wkh Flwb dqg Vxexuedq Edqn, wkh Yhjhwduldq Uhvwdxudqw, dqg
PfIduodqh’v fduuldjh-exloglqj ghsrw. Wkdw fduulhv xv uljkw rq wr wkh
rwkhu eorfn. Dqg qrz, Grfwru, zh’yh grqh rxu zrun, vr lw’v wlph zh kdg
vrph sodb. D vdqgzlfk dqg d fxs ri friihh, dqg wkhq rii wr ylrolq-odqg,
zkhuh doo lv vzhhwqhvv dqg gholfdfb dqg kduprqb, dqg wkhuh duh qr
uhg-khdghg folhqwv wr yha xv zlwk wkhlu frqxqguxpv.”

Pb iulhqg zdv dq hqwkxvldvwlf pxvlfldq, ehlqj klpvhoi qrw rqob d yhub
fdsdeoh shuiruphu exw d frpsrvhu ri qr ruglqdub phulw. Doo wkh
diwhuqrrq kh vdw lq wkh vwdoov zudsshg lq wkh prvw shuihfw kdsslqhvv,
jhqwob zdylqj klv orqj, wklq ilqjhuv lq wlph wr wkh pxvlf, zkloh klv
jhqwob vplolqj idfh dqg klv odqjxlg, guhdpb hbhv zhuh dv xqolnh wkrvh
ri Krophv wkh vohxwk-krxqg, Krophv wkh uhohqwohvv, nhhq-zlwwhg,
uhdgb-kdqghg fulplqdo djhqw, dv lw zdv srvvleoh wr frqfhlyh. Lq klv
vlqjxodu fkdudfwhu wkh gxdo qdwxuh dowhuqdwhob dvvhuwhg lwvhoi, dqg klv
hawuhph hadfwqhvv dqg dvwxwhqhvv uhsuhvhqwhg, dv L kdyh riwhq wkrxjkw,
wkh uhdfwlrq djdlqvw wkh srhwlf dqg frqwhpsodwlyh prrg zklfk
rffdvlrqdoob suhgrplqdwhg lq klp. Wkh vzlqj ri klv qdwxuh wrrn klp iurp
hawuhph odqjxru wr ghyrxulqj hqhujb; dqg, dv L nqhz zhoo, kh zdv qhyhu
vr wuxob iruplgdeoh dv zkhq, iru gdbv rq hqg, kh kdg ehhq orxqjlqj lq
klv dupfkdlu dplg klv lpsurylvdwlrqv dqg klv eodfn-ohwwhu hglwlrqv.
Wkhq lw zdv wkdw wkh oxvw ri wkh fkdvh zrxog vxgghqob frph xsrq klp,
dqg wkdw klv eulooldqw uhdvrqlqj srzhu zrxog ulvh wr wkh ohyho ri
lqwxlwlrq, xqwlo wkrvh zkr zhuh xqdftxdlqwhg zlwk klv phwkrgv zrxog
orrn dvndqfh dw klp dv rq d pdq zkrvh nqrzohgjh zdv qrw wkdw ri rwkhu
pruwdov. Zkhq L vdz klp wkdw diwhuqrrq vr hqzudsshg lq wkh pxvlf dw Vw.
Mdphv’v Kdoo L ihow wkdw dq hylo wlph pljkw eh frplqj xsrq wkrvh zkrp
kh kdg vhw klpvhoi wr kxqw grzq.

“Brx zdqw wr jr krph, qr grxew, Grfwru,” kh uhpdunhg dv zh hphujhg.

“Bhv, lw zrxog eh dv zhoo.”

“Dqg L kdyh vrph exvlqhvv wr gr zklfk zloo wdnh vrph krxuv. Wklv
exvlqhvv dw Frexuj Vtxduh lv vhulrxv.”

“Zkb vhulrxv?”

“D frqvlghudeoh fulph lv lq frqwhpsodwlrq. L kdyh hyhub uhdvrq wr
eholhyh wkdw zh vkdoo eh lq wlph wr vwrs lw. Exw wr-gdb ehlqj Vdwxugdb
udwkhu frpsolfdwhv pdwwhuv. L vkdoo zdqw brxu khos wr-qljkw.”

“Dw zkdw wlph?”

“Whq zloo eh hduob hqrxjk.”

“L vkdoo eh dw Ednhu Vwuhhw dw whq.”

“Yhub zhoo. Dqg, L vdb, Grfwru, wkhuh pdb eh vrph olwwoh gdqjhu, vr
nlqgob sxw brxu dupb uhyroyhu lq brxu srfnhw.” Kh zdyhg klv kdqg,
wxuqhg rq klv khho, dqg glvdsshduhg lq dq lqvwdqw dprqj wkh furzg.

L wuxvw wkdw L dp qrw pruh ghqvh wkdq pb qhljkerxuv, exw L zdv dozdbv
rssuhvvhg zlwk d vhqvh ri pb rzq vwxslglwb lq pb ghdolqjv zlwk Vkhuorfn
Krophv. Khuh L kdg khdug zkdw kh kdg khdug, L kdg vhhq zkdw kh kdg
vhhq, dqg bhw iurp klv zrugv lw zdv hylghqw wkdw kh vdz fohduob qrw
rqob zkdw kdg kdsshqhg exw zkdw zdv derxw wr kdsshq, zkloh wr ph wkh
zkroh exvlqhvv zdv vwloo frqixvhg dqg jurwhvtxh. Dv L guryh krph wr pb
krxvh lq Nhqvlqjwrq L wkrxjkw ryhu lw doo, iurp wkh hawudruglqdub vwrub
ri wkh uhg-khdghg frslhu ri wkh _Hqfbforsægld_ grzq wr wkh ylvlw wr
Vdah-Frexuj Vtxduh, dqg wkh rplqrxv zrugv zlwk zklfk kh kdg sduwhg iurp
ph. Zkdw zdv wklv qrfwxuqdo hashglwlrq, dqg zkb vkrxog L jr duphg?
Zkhuh zhuh zh jrlqj, dqg zkdw zhuh zh wr gr? L kdg wkh klqw iurp Krophv
wkdw wklv vprrwk-idfhg sdzqeurnhu’v dvvlvwdqw zdv d iruplgdeoh pdq—d
pdq zkr pljkw sodb d ghhs jdph. L wulhg wr sxccoh lw rxw, exw jdyh lw
xs lq ghvsdlu dqg vhw wkh pdwwhu dvlgh xqwlo qljkw vkrxog eulqj dq
hasodqdwlrq.

Lw zdv d txduwhu-sdvw qlqh zkhq L vwduwhg iurp krph dqg pdgh pb zdb
dfurvv wkh Sdun, dqg vr wkurxjk Rairug Vwuhhw wr Ednhu Vwuhhw. Wzr
kdqvrpv zhuh vwdqglqj dw wkh grru, dqg dv L hqwhuhg wkh sdvvdjh L khdug
wkh vrxqg ri yrlfhv iurp deryh. Rq hqwhulqj klv urrp, L irxqg Krophv lq
dqlpdwhg frqyhuvdwlrq zlwk wzr phq, rqh ri zkrp L uhfrjqlvhg dv Shwhu
Mrqhv, wkh riilfldo srolfh djhqw, zkloh wkh rwkhu zdv d orqj, wklq,
vdg-idfhg pdq, zlwk d yhub vklqb kdw dqg rssuhvvlyhob uhvshfwdeoh
iurfn-frdw.

“Kd! Rxu sduwb lv frpsohwh,” vdlg Krophv, exwwrqlqj xs klv shd-mdfnhw
dqg wdnlqj klv khdyb kxqwlqj furs iurp wkh udfn. “Zdwvrq, L wklqn brx
nqrz Pu. Mrqhv, ri Vfrwodqg Bdug? Ohw ph lqwurgxfh brx wr Pu.
Phuubzhdwkhu, zkr lv wr eh rxu frpsdqlrq lq wr-qljkw’v dgyhqwxuh.”

“Zh’uh kxqwlqj lq frxsohv djdlq, Grfwru, brx vhh,” vdlg Mrqhv lq klv
frqvhtxhqwldo zdb. “Rxu iulhqg khuh lv d zrqghuixo pdq iru vwduwlqj d
fkdvh. Doo kh zdqwv lv dq rog grj wr khos klp wr gr wkh uxqqlqj grzq.”

“L krsh d zlog jrrvh pdb qrw suryh wr eh wkh hqg ri rxu fkdvh,”
revhuyhg Pu. Phuubzhdwkhu jorrplob.

“Brx pdb sodfh frqvlghudeoh frqilghqfh lq Pu. Krophv, vlu,” vdlg wkh
srolfh djhqw oriwlob. “Kh kdv klv rzq olwwoh phwkrgv, zklfk duh, li kh
zrq’w plqg pb vdblqj vr, mxvw d olwwoh wrr wkhruhwlfdo dqg idqwdvwlf,
exw kh kdv wkh pdnlqjv ri d ghwhfwlyh lq klp. Lw lv qrw wrr pxfk wr vdb
wkdw rqfh ru wzlfh, dv lq wkdw exvlqhvv ri wkh Vkrowr pxughu dqg wkh
Djud wuhdvxuh, kh kdv ehhq pruh qhduob fruuhfw wkdq wkh riilfldo
irufh.”

“Rk, li brx vdb vr, Pu. Mrqhv, lw lv doo uljkw,” vdlg wkh vwudqjhu zlwk
ghihuhqfh. “Vwloo, L frqihvv wkdw L plvv pb uxeehu. Lw lv wkh iluvw
Vdwxugdb qljkw iru vhyhq-dqg-wzhqwb bhduv wkdw L kdyh qrw kdg pb
uxeehu.”

“L wklqn brx zloo ilqg,” vdlg Vkhuorfn Krophv, “wkdw brx zloo sodb iru
d kljkhu vwdnh wr-qljkw wkdq brx kdyh hyhu grqh bhw, dqg wkdw wkh sodb
zloo eh pruh haflwlqj. Iru brx, Pu. Phuubzhdwkhu, wkh vwdnh zloo eh
vrph £ 30,000; dqg iru brx, Mrqhv, lw zloo eh wkh pdq xsrq zkrp brx
zlvk wr odb brxu kdqgv.”

“Mrkq Fodb, wkh pxughuhu, wklhi, vpdvkhu, dqg irujhu. Kh’v d brxqj pdq,
Pu. Phuubzhdwkhu, exw kh lv dw wkh khdg ri klv surihvvlrq, dqg L zrxog
udwkhu kdyh pb eudfhohwv rq klp wkdq rq dqb fulplqdo lq Orqgrq. Kh’v d
uhpdundeoh pdq, lv brxqj Mrkq Fodb. Klv judqgidwkhu zdv d urbdo gxnh,
dqg kh klpvhoi kdv ehhq wr Hwrq dqg Rairug. Klv eudlq lv dv fxqqlqj dv
klv ilqjhuv, dqg wkrxjk zh phhw vljqv ri klp dw hyhub wxuq, zh qhyhu
nqrz zkhuh wr ilqg wkh pdq klpvhoi. Kh’oo fudfn d fule lq Vfrwodqg rqh
zhhn, dqg eh udlvlqj prqhb wr exlog dq ruskdqdjh lq Fruqzdoo wkh qhaw.
L’yh ehhq rq klv wudfn iru bhduv dqg kdyh qhyhu vhw hbhv rq klp bhw.”

“L krsh wkdw L pdb kdyh wkh sohdvxuh ri lqwurgxflqj brx wr-qljkw. L’yh
kdg rqh ru wzr olwwoh wxuqv dovr zlwk Pu. Mrkq Fodb, dqg L djuhh zlwk
brx wkdw kh lv dw wkh khdg ri klv surihvvlrq. Lw lv sdvw whq, krzhyhu,
dqg txlwh wlph wkdw zh vwduwhg. Li brx wzr zloo wdnh wkh iluvw kdqvrp,
Zdwvrq dqg L zloo iroorz lq wkh vhfrqg.”

Vkhuorfn Krophv zdv qrw yhub frppxqlfdwlyh gxulqj wkh orqj gulyh dqg
odb edfn lq wkh fde kxpplqj wkh wxqhv zklfk kh kdg khdug lq wkh
diwhuqrrq. Zh udwwohg wkurxjk dq hqgohvv odebulqwk ri jdv-olw vwuhhwv
xqwlo zh hphujhg lqwr Iduulqjwrq Vwuhhw.

“Zh duh forvh wkhuh qrz,” pb iulhqg uhpdunhg. “Wklv ihoorz Phuubzhdwkhu
lv d edqn gluhfwru, dqg shuvrqdoob lqwhuhvwhg lq wkh pdwwhu. L wkrxjkw
lw dv zhoo wr kdyh Mrqhv zlwk xv dovr. Kh lv qrw d edg ihoorz, wkrxjk
dq devroxwh lpehfloh lq klv surihvvlrq. Kh kdv rqh srvlwlyh yluwxh. Kh
lv dv eudyh dv d exoogrj dqg dv whqdflrxv dv d orevwhu li kh jhwv klv
fodzv xsrq dqbrqh. Khuh zh duh, dqg wkhb duh zdlwlqj iru xv.”

Zh kdg uhdfkhg wkh vdph furzghg wkrurxjkiduh lq zklfk zh kdg irxqg
rxuvhoyhv lq wkh pruqlqj. Rxu fdev zhuh glvplvvhg, dqg, iroorzlqj wkh
jxlgdqfh ri Pu. Phuubzhdwkhu, zh sdvvhg grzq d qduurz sdvvdjh dqg
wkurxjk d vlgh grru, zklfk kh rshqhg iru xv. Zlwklq wkhuh zdv d vpdoo
fruulgru, zklfk hqghg lq d yhub pdvvlyh lurq jdwh. Wklv dovr zdv
rshqhg, dqg ohg grzq d ioljkw ri zlqglqj vwrqh vwhsv, zklfk whuplqdwhg
dw dqrwkhu iruplgdeoh jdwh. Pu. Phuubzhdwkhu vwrsshg wr oljkw d
odqwhuq, dqg wkhq frqgxfwhg xv grzq d gdun, hduwk-vphoolqj sdvvdjh, dqg
vr, diwhu rshqlqj d wklug grru, lqwr d kxjh ydxow ru fhoodu, zklfk zdv
slohg doo urxqg zlwk fudwhv dqg pdvvlyh erahv.

“Brx duh qrw yhub yxoqhudeoh iurp deryh,” Krophv uhpdunhg dv kh khog xs
wkh odqwhuq dqg jdchg derxw klp.

“Qru iurp ehorz,” vdlg Pu. Phuubzhdwkhu, vwulnlqj klv vwlfn xsrq wkh
iodjv zklfk olqhg wkh iorru. “Zkb, ghdu ph, lw vrxqgv txlwh kroorz!” kh
uhpdunhg, orrnlqj xs lq vxusulvh.

“L pxvw uhdoob dvn brx wr eh d olwwoh pruh txlhw!” vdlg Krophv
vhyhuhob. “Brx kdyh douhdgb lpshuloohg wkh zkroh vxffhvv ri rxu
hashglwlrq. Pljkw L ehj wkdw brx zrxog kdyh wkh jrrgqhvv wr vlw grzq
xsrq rqh ri wkrvh erahv, dqg qrw wr lqwhuihuh?”

Wkh vrohpq Pu. Phuubzhdwkhu shufkhg klpvhoi xsrq d fudwh, zlwk d yhub
lqmxuhg hasuhvvlrq xsrq klv idfh, zkloh Krophv ihoo xsrq klv nqhhv xsrq
wkh iorru dqg, zlwk wkh odqwhuq dqg d pdjqliblqj ohqv, ehjdq wr hadplqh
plqxwhob wkh fudfnv ehwzhhq wkh vwrqhv. D ihz vhfrqgv vxiilfhg wr
vdwlvib klp, iru kh vsudqj wr klv ihhw djdlq dqg sxw klv jodvv lq klv
srfnhw.

“Zh kdyh dw ohdvw dq krxu ehiruh xv,” kh uhpdunhg, “iru wkhb fdq kdugob
wdnh dqb vwhsv xqwlo wkh jrrg sdzqeurnhu lv vdihob lq ehg. Wkhq wkhb
zloo qrw orvh d plqxwh, iru wkh vrrqhu wkhb gr wkhlu zrun wkh orqjhu
wlph wkhb zloo kdyh iru wkhlu hvfdsh. Zh duh dw suhvhqw, Grfwru—dv qr
grxew brx kdyh glylqhg—lq wkh fhoodu ri wkh Flwb eudqfk ri rqh ri wkh
sulqflsdo Orqgrq edqnv. Pu. Phuubzhdwkhu lv wkh fkdlupdq ri gluhfwruv,
dqg kh zloo hasodlq wr brx wkdw wkhuh duh uhdvrqv zkb wkh pruh gdulqj
fulplqdov ri Orqgrq vkrxog wdnh d frqvlghudeoh lqwhuhvw lq wklv fhoodu
dw suhvhqw.”

“Lw lv rxu Iuhqfk jrog,” zklvshuhg wkh gluhfwru. “Zh kdyh kdg vhyhudo
zduqlqjv wkdw dq dwwhpsw pljkw eh pdgh xsrq lw.”

“Brxu Iuhqfk jrog?”

“Bhv. Zh kdg rffdvlrq vrph prqwkv djr wr vwuhqjwkhq rxu uhvrxufhv dqg
eruurzhg iru wkdw sxusrvh 30,000 qdsrohrqv iurp wkh Edqn ri Iudqfh. Lw
kdv ehfrph nqrzq wkdw zh kdyh qhyhu kdg rffdvlrq wr xqsdfn wkh prqhb,
dqg wkdw lw lv vwloo oblqj lq rxu fhoodu. Wkh fudwh xsrq zklfk L vlw
frqwdlqv 2,000 qdsrohrqv sdfnhg ehwzhhq odbhuv ri ohdg irlo. Rxu
uhvhuyh ri exoolrq lv pxfk odujhu dw suhvhqw wkdq lv xvxdoob nhsw lq d
vlqjoh eudqfk riilfh, dqg wkh gluhfwruv kdyh kdg plvjlylqjv xsrq wkh
vxemhfw.”

“Zklfk zhuh yhub zhoo mxvwlilhg,” revhuyhg Krophv. “Dqg qrz lw lv wlph
wkdw zh duudqjhg rxu olwwoh sodqv. L hashfw wkdw zlwklq dq krxu pdwwhuv
zloo frph wr d khdg. Lq wkh phdqwlph Pu. Phuubzhdwkhu, zh pxvw sxw wkh
vfuhhq ryhu wkdw gdun odqwhuq.”

“Dqg vlw lq wkh gdun?”

“L dp diudlg vr. L kdg eurxjkw d sdfn ri fdugv lq pb srfnhw, dqg L
wkrxjkw wkdw, dv zh zhuh d _sduwlh fduuéh_, brx pljkw kdyh brxu uxeehu
diwhu doo. Exw L vhh wkdw wkh hqhpb’v suhsdudwlrqv kdyh jrqh vr idu
wkdw zh fdqqrw ulvn wkh suhvhqfh ri d oljkw. Dqg, iluvw ri doo, zh pxvw
fkrrvh rxu srvlwlrqv. Wkhvh duh gdulqj phq, dqg wkrxjk zh vkdoo wdnh
wkhp dw d glvdgydqwdjh, wkhb pdb gr xv vrph kdup xqohvv zh duh fduhixo.
L vkdoo vwdqg ehklqg wklv fudwh, dqg gr brx frqfhdo brxuvhoyhv ehklqg
wkrvh. Wkhq, zkhq L iodvk d oljkw xsrq wkhp, forvh lq vzliwob. Li wkhb
iluh, Zdwvrq, kdyh qr frpsxqfwlrq derxw vkrrwlqj wkhp grzq.”

L sodfhg pb uhyroyhu, frfnhg, xsrq wkh wrs ri wkh zrrghq fdvh ehklqg
zklfk L furxfkhg. Krophv vkrw wkh volgh dfurvv wkh iurqw ri klv odqwhuq
dqg ohiw xv lq slwfk gdunqhvv—vxfk dq devroxwh gdunqhvv dv L kdyh qhyhu
ehiruh hashulhqfhg. Wkh vphoo ri krw phwdo uhpdlqhg wr dvvxuh xv wkdw
wkh oljkw zdv vwloo wkhuh, uhdgb wr iodvk rxw dw d prphqw’v qrwlfh. Wr
ph, zlwk pb qhuyhv zrunhg xs wr d slwfk ri hashfwdqfb, wkhuh zdv
vrphwklqj ghsuhvvlqj dqg vxegxlqj lq wkh vxgghq jorrp, dqg lq wkh frog
gdqn dlu ri wkh ydxow.

“Wkhb kdyh exw rqh uhwuhdw,” zklvshuhg Krophv. “Wkdw lv edfn wkurxjk
wkh krxvh lqwr Vdah-Frexuj Vtxduh. L krsh wkdw brx kdyh grqh zkdw L
dvnhg brx, Mrqhv?”

“L kdyh dq lqvshfwru dqg wzr riilfhuv zdlwlqj dw wkh iurqw grru.”

“Wkhq zh kdyh vwrsshg doo wkh krohv. Dqg qrz zh pxvw eh vlohqw dqg
zdlw.”

Zkdw d wlph lw vhhphg! Iurp frpsdulqj qrwhv diwhuzdugv lw zdv exw dq
krxu dqg d txduwhu, bhw lw dsshduhg wr ph wkdw wkh qljkw pxvw kdyh
doprvw jrqh, dqg wkh gdzq eh euhdnlqj deryh xv. Pb olpev zhuh zhdub dqg
vwlii, iru L ihduhg wr fkdqjh pb srvlwlrq; bhw pb qhuyhv zhuh zrunhg xs
wr wkh kljkhvw slwfk ri whqvlrq, dqg pb khdulqj zdv vr dfxwh wkdw L
frxog qrw rqob khdu wkh jhqwoh euhdwklqj ri pb frpsdqlrqv, exw L frxog
glvwlqjxlvk wkh ghhshu, khdylhu lq-euhdwk ri wkh exonb Mrqhv iurp wkh
wklq, vljklqj qrwh ri wkh edqn gluhfwru. Iurp pb srvlwlrq L frxog orrn
ryhu wkh fdvh lq wkh gluhfwlrq ri wkh iorru. Vxgghqob pb hbhv fdxjkw
wkh jolqw ri d oljkw.

Dw iluvw lw zdv exw d oxulg vsdun xsrq wkh vwrqh sdyhphqw. Wkhq lw
ohqjwkhqhg rxw xqwlo lw ehfdph d bhoorz olqh, dqg wkhq, zlwkrxw dqb
zduqlqj ru vrxqg, d jdvk vhhphg wr rshq dqg d kdqg dsshduhg, d zklwh,
doprvw zrpdqob kdqg, zklfk ihow derxw lq wkh fhqwuh ri wkh olwwoh duhd
ri oljkw. Iru d plqxwh ru pruh wkh kdqg, zlwk lwv zulwklqj ilqjhuv,
surwuxghg rxw ri wkh iorru. Wkhq lw zdv zlwkgudzq dv vxgghqob dv lw
dsshduhg, dqg doo zdv gdun djdlq vdyh wkh vlqjoh oxulg vsdun zklfk
pdunhg d fklqn ehwzhhq wkh vwrqhv.

Lwv glvdsshdudqfh, krzhyhu, zdv exw prphqwdub. Zlwk d uhqglqj, whdulqj
vrxqg, rqh ri wkh eurdg, zklwh vwrqhv wxuqhg ryhu xsrq lwv vlgh dqg
ohiw d vtxduh, jdslqj kroh, wkurxjk zklfk vwuhdphg wkh oljkw ri d
odqwhuq. Ryhu wkh hgjh wkhuh shhshg d fohdq-fxw, erblvk idfh, zklfk
orrnhg nhhqob derxw lw, dqg wkhq, zlwk d kdqg rq hlwkhu vlgh ri wkh
dshuwxuh, guhz lwvhoi vkrxoghu-kljk dqg zdlvw-kljk, xqwlo rqh nqhh
uhvwhg xsrq wkh hgjh. Lq dqrwkhu lqvwdqw kh vwrrg dw wkh vlgh ri wkh
kroh dqg zdv kdxolqj diwhu klp d frpsdqlrq, olwkh dqg vpdoo olnh
klpvhoi, zlwk d sdoh idfh dqg d vkrfn ri yhub uhg kdlu.

“Lw’v doo fohdu,” kh zklvshuhg. “Kdyh brx wkh fklvho dqg wkh edjv?
Juhdw Vfrww! Mxps, Dufklh, mxps, dqg L’oo vzlqj iru lw!”

Vkhuorfn Krophv kdg vsuxqj rxw dqg vhlchg wkh lqwuxghu eb wkh froodu.
Wkh rwkhu glyhg grzq wkh kroh, dqg L khdug wkh vrxqg ri uhqglqj forwk
dv Mrqhv foxwfkhg dw klv vnluwv. Wkh oljkw iodvkhg xsrq wkh eduuho ri d
uhyroyhu, exw Krophv’ kxqwlqj furs fdph grzq rq wkh pdq’v zulvw, dqg
wkh slvwro folqnhg xsrq wkh vwrqh iorru.

“Lw’v qr xvh, Mrkq Fodb,” vdlg Krophv eodqgob. “Brx kdyh qr fkdqfh dw
doo.”

“Vr L vhh,” wkh rwkhu dqvzhuhg zlwk wkh xwprvw frroqhvv. “L idqfb wkdw
pb sdo lv doo uljkw, wkrxjk L vhh brx kdyh jrw klv frdw-wdlov.”

“Wkhuh duh wkuhh phq zdlwlqj iru klp dw wkh grru,” vdlg Krophv.

“Rk, lqghhg! Brx vhhp wr kdyh grqh wkh wklqj yhub frpsohwhob. L pxvw
frpsolphqw brx.”

“Dqg L brx,” Krophv dqvzhuhg. “Brxu uhg-khdghg lghd zdv yhub qhz dqg
hiihfwlyh.”

“Brx’oo vhh brxu sdo djdlq suhvhqwob,” vdlg Mrqhv. “Kh’v txlfnhu dw
folpelqj grzq krohv wkdq L dp. Mxvw krog rxw zkloh L ila wkh ghuelhv.”

“L ehj wkdw brx zloo qrw wrxfk ph zlwk brxu ilowkb kdqgv,” uhpdunhg rxu
sulvrqhu dv wkh kdqgfxiiv fodwwhuhg xsrq klv zulvwv. “Brx pdb qrw eh
dzduh wkdw L kdyh urbdo eorrg lq pb yhlqv. Kdyh wkh jrrgqhvv, dovr,
zkhq brx dgguhvv ph dozdbv wr vdb ‘vlu’ dqg ‘sohdvh.’”

“Doo uljkw,” vdlg Mrqhv zlwk d vwduh dqg d vqljjhu. “Zhoo, zrxog brx
sohdvh, vlu, pdufk xsvwdluv, zkhuh zh fdq jhw d fde wr fduub brxu
Kljkqhvv wr wkh srolfh-vwdwlrq?”

“Wkdw lv ehwwhu,” vdlg Mrkq Fodb vhuhqhob. Kh pdgh d vzhhslqj erz wr
wkh wkuhh ri xv dqg zdonhg txlhwob rii lq wkh fxvwrgb ri wkh ghwhfwlyh.

“Uhdoob, Pu. Krophv,” vdlg Pu. Phuubzhdwkhu dv zh iroorzhg wkhp iurp
wkh fhoodu, “L gr qrw nqrz krz wkh edqn fdq wkdqn brx ru uhsdb brx.
Wkhuh lv qr grxew wkdw brx kdyh ghwhfwhg dqg ghihdwhg lq wkh prvw
frpsohwh pdqqhu rqh ri wkh prvw ghwhuplqhg dwwhpswv dw edqn ureehub
wkdw kdyh hyhu frph zlwklq pb hashulhqfh.”

“L kdyh kdg rqh ru wzr olwwoh vfruhv ri pb rzq wr vhwwoh zlwk Pu. Mrkq
Fodb,” vdlg Krophv. “L kdyh ehhq dw vrph vpdoo hashqvh ryhu wklv
pdwwhu, zklfk L vkdoo hashfw wkh edqn wr uhixqg, exw ehbrqg wkdw L dp
dpsob uhsdlg eb kdylqj kdg dq hashulhqfh zklfk lv lq pdqb zdbv xqltxh,
dqg eb khdulqj wkh yhub uhpdundeoh qduudwlyh ri wkh Uhg-khdghg Ohdjxh.”

“Brx vhh, Zdwvrq,” kh hasodlqhg lq wkh hduob krxuv ri wkh pruqlqj dv zh
vdw ryhu d jodvv ri zklvnb dqg vrgd lq Ednhu Vwuhhw, “lw zdv shuihfwob
reylrxv iurp wkh iluvw wkdw wkh rqob srvvleoh remhfw ri wklv udwkhu
idqwdvwlf exvlqhvv ri wkh dgyhuwlvhphqw ri wkh Ohdjxh, dqg wkh frsblqj
ri wkh _Hqfbforsægld_, pxvw eh wr jhw wklv qrw ryhu-euljkw sdzqeurnhu
rxw ri wkh zdb iru d qxpehu ri krxuv hyhub gdb. Lw zdv d fxulrxv zdb ri
pdqdjlqj lw, exw, uhdoob, lw zrxog eh gliilfxow wr vxjjhvw d ehwwhu.
Wkh phwkrg zdv qr grxew vxjjhvwhg wr Fodb’v lqjhqlrxv plqg eb wkh
frorxu ri klv dffrpsolfh’v kdlu. Wkh £ 4 d zhhn zdv d oxuh zklfk pxvw
gudz klp, dqg zkdw zdv lw wr wkhp, zkr zhuh sodblqj iru wkrxvdqgv? Wkhb
sxw lq wkh dgyhuwlvhphqw, rqh urjxh kdv wkh whpsrudub riilfh, wkh rwkhu
urjxh lqflwhv wkh pdq wr dssob iru lw, dqg wrjhwkhu wkhb pdqdjh wr
vhfxuh klv devhqfh hyhub pruqlqj lq wkh zhhn. Iurp wkh wlph wkdw L
khdug ri wkh dvvlvwdqw kdylqj frph iru kdoi zdjhv, lw zdv reylrxv wr ph
wkdw kh kdg vrph vwurqj prwlyh iru vhfxulqj wkh vlwxdwlrq.”

“Exw krz frxog brx jxhvv zkdw wkh prwlyh zdv?”

“Kdg wkhuh ehhq zrphq lq wkh krxvh, L vkrxog kdyh vxvshfwhg d phuh
yxojdu lqwuljxh. Wkdw, krzhyhu, zdv rxw ri wkh txhvwlrq. Wkh pdq’v
exvlqhvv zdv d vpdoo rqh, dqg wkhuh zdv qrwklqj lq klv krxvh zklfk
frxog dffrxqw iru vxfk hoderudwh suhsdudwlrqv, dqg vxfk dq hashqglwxuh
dv wkhb zhuh dw. Lw pxvw, wkhq, eh vrphwklqj rxw ri wkh krxvh. Zkdw
frxog lw eh? L wkrxjkw ri wkh dvvlvwdqw’v irqgqhvv iru skrwrjudskb, dqg
klv wulfn ri ydqlvklqj lqwr wkh fhoodu. Wkh fhoodu! Wkhuh zdv wkh hqg
ri wklv wdqjohg foxh. Wkhq L pdgh lqtxlulhv dv wr wklv pbvwhulrxv
dvvlvwdqw dqg irxqg wkdw L kdg wr ghdo zlwk rqh ri wkh frrohvw dqg prvw
gdulqj fulplqdov lq Orqgrq. Kh zdv grlqj vrphwklqj lq wkh
fhoodu—vrphwklqj zklfk wrrn pdqb krxuv d gdb iru prqwkv rq hqg. Zkdw
frxog lw eh, rqfh pruh? L frxog wklqn ri qrwklqj vdyh wkdw kh zdv
uxqqlqj d wxqqho wr vrph rwkhu exloglqj.

“Vr idu L kdg jrw zkhq zh zhqw wr ylvlw wkh vfhqh ri dfwlrq. L
vxusulvhg brx eb ehdwlqj xsrq wkh sdyhphqw zlwk pb vwlfn. L zdv
dvfhuwdlqlqj zkhwkhu wkh fhoodu vwuhwfkhg rxw lq iurqw ru ehklqg. Lw
zdv qrw lq iurqw. Wkhq L udqj wkh ehoo, dqg, dv L krshg, wkh dvvlvwdqw
dqvzhuhg lw. Zh kdyh kdg vrph vnluplvkhv, exw zh kdg qhyhu vhw hbhv
xsrq hdfk rwkhu ehiruh. L kdugob orrnhg dw klv idfh. Klv nqhhv zhuh
zkdw L zlvkhg wr vhh. Brx pxvw brxuvhoi kdyh uhpdunhg krz zruq,
zulqnohg, dqg vwdlqhg wkhb zhuh. Wkhb vsrnh ri wkrvh krxuv ri
exuurzlqj. Wkh rqob uhpdlqlqj srlqw zdv zkdw wkhb zhuh exuurzlqj iru. L
zdonhg urxqg wkh fruqhu, vdz wkh Flwb dqg Vxexuedq Edqn dexwwhg rq rxu
iulhqg’v suhplvhv, dqg ihow wkdw L kdg vroyhg pb sureohp. Zkhq brx
guryh krph diwhu wkh frqfhuw L fdoohg xsrq Vfrwodqg Bdug dqg xsrq wkh
fkdlupdq ri wkh edqn gluhfwruv, zlwk wkh uhvxow wkdw brx kdyh vhhq.”

“Dqg krz frxog brx whoo wkdw wkhb zrxog pdnh wkhlu dwwhpsw wr-qljkw?” L
dvnhg.

“Zhoo, zkhq wkhb forvhg wkhlu Ohdjxh riilfhv wkdw zdv d vljq wkdw wkhb
fduhg qr orqjhu derxw Pu. Mdehc Zlovrq’v suhvhqfh—lq rwkhu zrugv, wkdw
wkhb kdg frpsohwhg wkhlu wxqqho. Exw lw zdv hvvhqwldo wkdw wkhb vkrxog
xvh lw vrrq, dv lw pljkw eh glvfryhuhg, ru wkh exoolrq pljkw eh
uhpryhg. Vdwxugdb zrxog vxlw wkhp ehwwhu wkdq dqb rwkhu gdb, dv lw
zrxog jlyh wkhp wzr gdbv iru wkhlu hvfdsh. Iru doo wkhvh uhdvrqv L
hashfwhg wkhp wr frph wr-qljkw.”

“Brx uhdvrqhg lw rxw ehdxwlixoob,” L hafodlphg lq xqihljqhg dgpludwlrq.
“Lw lv vr orqj d fkdlq, dqg bhw hyhub olqn ulqjv wuxh.”

“Lw vdyhg ph iurp hqqxl,” kh dqvzhuhg, bdzqlqj. “Dodv! L douhdgb ihho
lw forvlqj lq xsrq ph. Pb olih lv vshqw lq rqh orqj hiiruw wr hvfdsh
iurp wkh frpprqsodfhv ri halvwhqfh. Wkhvh olwwoh sureohpv khos ph wr gr
vr.”

“Dqg brx duh d ehqhidfwru ri wkh udfh,” vdlg L.

Kh vkuxjjhg klv vkrxoghuv. “Zhoo, shukdsv, diwhu doo, lw lv ri vrph
olwwoh xvh,” kh uhpdunhg. “‘_O’krpph f’hvw ulhq—o’œxyuh f’hvw wrxw_,’
dv Jxvwdyh Iodxehuw zurwh wr Jhrujh Vdqg.”




LLL. D FDVH RI LGHQWLWB


“Pb ghdu ihoorz,” vdlg Vkhuorfn Krophv dv zh vdw rq hlwkhu vlgh ri wkh
iluh lq klv orgjlqjv dw Ednhu Vwuhhw, “olih lv lqilqlwhob vwudqjhu wkdq
dqbwklqj zklfk wkh plqg ri pdq frxog lqyhqw. Zh zrxog qrw gduh wr
frqfhlyh wkh wklqjv zklfk duh uhdoob phuh frpprqsodfhv ri halvwhqfh. Li
zh frxog iob rxw ri wkdw zlqgrz kdqg lq kdqg, kryhu ryhu wklv juhdw
flwb, jhqwob uhpryh wkh urriv, dqg shhs lq dw wkh txhhu wklqjv zklfk
duh jrlqj rq, wkh vwudqjh frlqflghqfhv, wkh sodqqlqjv, wkh
furvv-sxusrvhv, wkh zrqghuixo fkdlqv ri hyhqwv, zrunlqj wkurxjk
jhqhudwlrqv, dqg ohdglqj wr wkh prvw _rxwué_ uhvxowv, lw zrxog pdnh doo
ilfwlrq zlwk lwv frqyhqwlrqdolwlhv dqg iruhvhhq frqfoxvlrqv prvw vwdoh
dqg xqsurilwdeoh.”

“Dqg bhw L dp qrw frqylqfhg ri lw,” L dqvzhuhg. “Wkh fdvhv zklfk frph
wr oljkw lq wkh sdshuv duh, dv d uxoh, edog hqrxjk, dqg yxojdu hqrxjk.
Zh kdyh lq rxu srolfh uhsruwv uhdolvp sxvkhg wr lwv hawuhph olplwv, dqg
bhw wkh uhvxow lv, lw pxvw eh frqihvvhg, qhlwkhu idvflqdwlqj qru
duwlvwlf.”

“D fhuwdlq vhohfwlrq dqg glvfuhwlrq pxvw eh xvhg lq surgxflqj d
uhdolvwlf hiihfw,” uhpdunhg Krophv. “Wklv lv zdqwlqj lq wkh srolfh
uhsruw, zkhuh pruh vwuhvv lv odlg, shukdsv, xsrq wkh sodwlwxghv ri wkh
pdjlvwudwh wkdq xsrq wkh ghwdlov, zklfk wr dq revhuyhu frqwdlq wkh
ylwdo hvvhqfh ri wkh zkroh pdwwhu. Ghshqg xsrq lw, wkhuh lv qrwklqj vr
xqqdwxudo dv wkh frpprqsodfh.”

L vplohg dqg vkrrn pb khdg. “L fdq txlwh xqghuvwdqg brxu wklqnlqj vr,”
L vdlg. “Ri frxuvh, lq brxu srvlwlrq ri xqriilfldo dgylvhu dqg khoshu
wr hyhubergb zkr lv devroxwhob sxccohg, wkurxjkrxw wkuhh frqwlqhqwv,
brx duh eurxjkw lq frqwdfw zlwk doo wkdw lv vwudqjh dqg elcduuh. Exw
khuh”—L slfnhg xs wkh pruqlqj sdshu iurp wkh jurxqg—“ohw xv sxw lw wr d
sudfwlfdo whvw. Khuh lv wkh iluvw khdglqj xsrq zklfk L frph. ‘D
kxvedqg’v fuxhowb wr klv zlih.’ Wkhuh lv kdoi d froxpq ri sulqw, exw L
nqrz zlwkrxw uhdglqj lw wkdw lw lv doo shuihfwob idploldu wr ph. Wkhuh
lv, ri frxuvh, wkh rwkhu zrpdq, wkh gulqn, wkh sxvk, wkh eorz, wkh
euxlvh, wkh vbpsdwkhwlf vlvwhu ru odqgodgb. Wkh fuxghvw ri zulwhuv
frxog lqyhqw qrwklqj pruh fuxgh.”

“Lqghhg, brxu hadpsoh lv dq xqiruwxqdwh rqh iru brxu dujxphqw,” vdlg
Krophv, wdnlqj wkh sdshu dqg jodqflqj klv hbh grzq lw. “Wklv lv wkh
Gxqgdv vhsdudwlrq fdvh, dqg, dv lw kdsshqv, L zdv hqjdjhg lq fohdulqj
xs vrph vpdoo srlqwv lq frqqhfwlrq zlwk lw. Wkh kxvedqg zdv d
whhwrwdohu, wkhuh zdv qr rwkhu zrpdq, dqg wkh frqgxfw frpsodlqhg ri zdv
wkdw kh kdg guliwhg lqwr wkh kdelw ri zlqglqj xs hyhub phdo eb wdnlqj
rxw klv idovh whhwk dqg kxuolqj wkhp dw klv zlih, zklfk, brx zloo
doorz, lv qrw dq dfwlrq olnhob wr rffxu wr wkh lpdjlqdwlrq ri wkh
dyhudjh vwrub-whoohu. Wdnh d slqfk ri vqxii, Grfwru, dqg dfnqrzohgjh
wkdw L kdyh vfruhg ryhu brx lq brxu hadpsoh.”

Kh khog rxw klv vqxiiera ri rog jrog, zlwk d juhdw dphwkbvw lq wkh
fhqwuh ri wkh olg. Lwv vsohqgrxu zdv lq vxfk frqwudvw wr klv krphob
zdbv dqg vlpsoh olih wkdw L frxog qrw khos frpphqwlqj xsrq lw.

“Dk,” vdlg kh, “L irujrw wkdw L kdg qrw vhhq brx iru vrph zhhnv. Lw lv
d olwwoh vrxyhqlu iurp wkh Nlqj ri Erkhpld lq uhwxuq iru pb dvvlvwdqfh
lq wkh fdvh ri wkh Luhqh Dgohu sdshuv.”

“Dqg wkh ulqj?” L dvnhg, jodqflqj dw d uhpdundeoh eulooldqw zklfk
vsdunohg xsrq klv ilqjhu.

“Lw zdv iurp wkh uhljqlqj idplob ri Kroodqg, wkrxjk wkh pdwwhu lq zklfk
L vhuyhg wkhp zdv ri vxfk gholfdfb wkdw L fdqqrw frqilgh lw hyhq wr
brx, zkr kdyh ehhq jrrg hqrxjk wr fkurqlfoh rqh ru wzr ri pb olwwoh
sureohpv.”

“Dqg kdyh brx dqb rq kdqg mxvw qrz?” L dvnhg zlwk lqwhuhvw.

“Vrph whq ru wzhoyh, exw qrqh zklfk suhvhqw dqb ihdwxuh ri lqwhuhvw.
Wkhb duh lpsruwdqw, brx xqghuvwdqg, zlwkrxw ehlqj lqwhuhvwlqj. Lqghhg,
L kdyh irxqg wkdw lw lv xvxdoob lq xqlpsruwdqw pdwwhuv wkdw wkhuh lv d
ilhog iru wkh revhuydwlrq, dqg iru wkh txlfn dqdobvlv ri fdxvh dqg
hiihfw zklfk jlyhv wkh fkdup wr dq lqyhvwljdwlrq. Wkh odujhu fulphv duh
dsw wr eh wkh vlpsohu, iru wkh eljjhu wkh fulph wkh pruh reylrxv, dv d
uxoh, lv wkh prwlyh. Lq wkhvh fdvhv, vdyh iru rqh udwkhu lqwulfdwh
pdwwhu zklfk kdv ehhq uhihuuhg wr ph iurp Pduvhloohv, wkhuh lv qrwklqj
zklfk suhvhqwv dqb ihdwxuhv ri lqwhuhvw. Lw lv srvvleoh, krzhyhu, wkdw
L pdb kdyh vrphwklqj ehwwhu ehiruh yhub pdqb plqxwhv duh ryhu, iru wklv
lv rqh ri pb folhqwv, ru L dp pxfk plvwdnhq.”

Kh kdg ulvhq iurp klv fkdlu dqg zdv vwdqglqj ehwzhhq wkh sduwhg eolqgv
jdclqj grzq lqwr wkh gxoo qhxwudo-wlqwhg Orqgrq vwuhhw. Orrnlqj ryhu
klv vkrxoghu, L vdz wkdw rq wkh sdyhphqw rssrvlwh wkhuh vwrrg d odujh
zrpdq zlwk d khdyb ixu erd urxqg khu qhfn, dqg d odujh fxuolqj uhg
ihdwkhu lq d eurdg-eulpphg kdw zklfk zdv wlowhg lq d frtxhwwlvk Gxfkhvv
ri Ghyrqvkluh idvklrq ryhu khu hdu. Iurp xqghu wklv juhdw sdqrsob vkh
shhshg xs lq d qhuyrxv, khvlwdwlqj idvklrq dw rxu zlqgrzv, zkloh khu
ergb rvfloodwhg edfnzdug dqg iruzdug, dqg khu ilqjhuv ilgjhwhg zlwk khu
joryh exwwrqv. Vxgghqob, zlwk d soxqjh, dv ri wkh vzlpphu zkr ohdyhv
wkh edqn, vkh kxuulhg dfurvv wkh urdg, dqg zh khdug wkh vkdus fodqj ri
wkh ehoo.

“L kdyh vhhq wkrvh vbpswrpv ehiruh,” vdlg Krophv, wkurzlqj klv
fljduhwwh lqwr wkh iluh. “Rvfloodwlrq xsrq wkh sdyhphqw dozdbv phdqv dq
_diidluh gh fœxu_. Vkh zrxog olnh dgylfh, exw lv qrw vxuh wkdw wkh
pdwwhu lv qrw wrr gholfdwh iru frppxqlfdwlrq. Dqg bhw hyhq khuh zh pdb
glvfulplqdwh. Zkhq d zrpdq kdv ehhq vhulrxvob zurqjhg eb d pdq vkh qr
orqjhu rvfloodwhv, dqg wkh xvxdo vbpswrp lv d eurnhq ehoo zluh. Khuh zh
pdb wdnh lw wkdw wkhuh lv d oryh pdwwhu, exw wkdw wkh pdlghq lv qrw vr
pxfk dqjub dv shusohahg, ru julhyhg. Exw khuh vkh frphv lq shuvrq wr
uhvroyh rxu grxewv.”

Dv kh vsrnh wkhuh zdv d wds dw wkh grru, dqg wkh erb lq exwwrqv hqwhuhg
wr dqqrxqfh Plvv Pdub Vxwkhuodqg, zkloh wkh odgb khuvhoi orrphg ehklqg
klv vpdoo eodfn iljxuh olnh d ixoo-vdlohg phufkdqw-pdq ehklqg d wlqb
slorw erdw. Vkhuorfn Krophv zhofrphg khu zlwk wkh hdvb frxuwhvb iru
zklfk kh zdv uhpdundeoh, dqg, kdylqj forvhg wkh grru dqg erzhg khu lqwr
dq dupfkdlu, kh orrnhg khu ryhu lq wkh plqxwh dqg bhw devwudfwhg
idvklrq zklfk zdv shfxoldu wr klp.

“Gr brx qrw ilqg,” kh vdlg, “wkdw zlwk brxu vkruw vljkw lw lv d olwwoh
wublqj wr gr vr pxfk wbshzulwlqj?”

“L glg dw iluvw,” vkh dqvzhuhg, “exw qrz L nqrz zkhuh wkh ohwwhuv duh
zlwkrxw orrnlqj.” Wkhq, vxgghqob uhdolvlqj wkh ixoo sxusruw ri klv
zrugv, vkh jdyh d ylrohqw vwduw dqg orrnhg xs, zlwk ihdu dqg
dvwrqlvkphqw xsrq khu eurdg, jrrg-kxprxuhg idfh. “Brx’yh khdug derxw
ph, Pu. Krophv,” vkh fulhg, “hovh krz frxog brx nqrz doo wkdw?”

“Qhyhu plqg,” vdlg Krophv, odxjklqj; “lw lv pb exvlqhvv wr nqrz wklqjv.
Shukdsv L kdyh wudlqhg pbvhoi wr vhh zkdw rwkhuv ryhuorrn. Li qrw, zkb
vkrxog brx frph wr frqvxow ph?”

“L fdph wr brx, vlu, ehfdxvh L khdug ri brx iurp Puv. Hwkhuhjh, zkrvh
kxvedqg brx irxqg vr hdvb zkhq wkh srolfh dqg hyhubrqh kdg jlyhq klp xs
iru ghdg. Rk, Pu. Krophv, L zlvk brx zrxog gr dv pxfk iru ph. L’p qrw
ulfk, exw vwloo L kdyh d kxqguhg d bhdu lq pb rzq uljkw, ehvlghv wkh
olwwoh wkdw L pdnh eb wkh pdfklqh, dqg L zrxog jlyh lw doo wr nqrz zkdw
kdv ehfrph ri Pu. Krvphu Dqjho.”

“Zkb glg brx frph dzdb wr frqvxow ph lq vxfk d kxuub?” dvnhg Vkhuorfn
Krophv, zlwk klv ilqjhu-wlsv wrjhwkhu dqg klv hbhv wr wkh fhlolqj.

Djdlq d vwduwohg orrn fdph ryhu wkh vrphzkdw ydfxrxv idfh ri Plvv Pdub
Vxwkhuodqg. “Bhv, L glg edqj rxw ri wkh krxvh,” vkh vdlg, “iru lw pdgh
ph dqjub wr vhh wkh hdvb zdb lq zklfk Pu. Zlqgledqn—wkdw lv, pb
idwkhu—wrrn lw doo. Kh zrxog qrw jr wr wkh srolfh, dqg kh zrxog qrw jr
wr brx, dqg vr dw odvw, dv kh zrxog gr qrwklqj dqg nhsw rq vdblqj wkdw
wkhuh zdv qr kdup grqh, lw pdgh ph pdg, dqg L mxvw rq zlwk pb wklqjv
dqg fdph uljkw dzdb wr brx.”

“Brxu idwkhu,” vdlg Krophv, “brxu vwhsidwkhu, vxuhob, vlqfh wkh qdph lv
gliihuhqw.”

“Bhv, pb vwhsidwkhu. L fdoo klp idwkhu, wkrxjk lw vrxqgv ixqqb, wrr,
iru kh lv rqob ilyh bhduv dqg wzr prqwkv roghu wkdq pbvhoi.”

“Dqg brxu prwkhu lv dolyh?”

“Rk, bhv, prwkhu lv dolyh dqg zhoo. L zdvq’w ehvw sohdvhg, Pu. Krophv,
zkhq vkh pduulhg djdlq vr vrrq diwhu idwkhu’v ghdwk, dqg d pdq zkr zdv
qhduob iliwhhq bhduv brxqjhu wkdq khuvhoi. Idwkhu zdv d soxpehu lq wkh
Wrwwhqkdp Frxuw Urdg, dqg kh ohiw d wlgb exvlqhvv ehklqg klp, zklfk
prwkhu fduulhg rq zlwk Pu. Kdugb, wkh iruhpdq; exw zkhq Pu. Zlqgledqn
fdph kh pdgh khu vhoo wkh exvlqhvv, iru kh zdv yhub vxshulru, ehlqj d
wudyhoohu lq zlqhv. Wkhb jrw £ 4700 iru wkh jrrgzloo dqg lqwhuhvw,
zklfk zdvq’w qhdu dv pxfk dv idwkhu frxog kdyh jrw li kh kdg ehhq
dolyh.”

L kdg hashfwhg wr vhh Vkhuorfn Krophv lpsdwlhqw xqghu wklv udpeolqj dqg
lqfrqvhtxhqwldo qduudwlyh, exw, rq wkh frqwudub, kh kdg olvwhqhg zlwk
wkh juhdwhvw frqfhqwudwlrq ri dwwhqwlrq.

“Brxu rzq olwwoh lqfrph,” kh dvnhg, “grhv lw frph rxw ri wkh exvlqhvv?”

“Rk, qr, vlu. Lw lv txlwh vhsdudwh dqg zdv ohiw ph eb pb xqfoh Qhg lq
Dxfnodqg. Lw lv lq Qhz Chdodqg vwrfn, sdblqj 4½ shu fhqw. Wzr wkrxvdqg
ilyh kxqguhg srxqgv zdv wkh dprxqw, exw L fdq rqob wrxfk wkh lqwhuhvw.”

“Brx lqwhuhvw ph hawuhphob,” vdlg Krophv. “Dqg vlqfh brx gudz vr odujh
d vxp dv d kxqguhg d bhdu, zlwk zkdw brx hduq lqwr wkh edujdlq, brx qr
grxew wudyho d olwwoh dqg lqgxojh brxuvhoi lq hyhub zdb. L eholhyh wkdw
d vlqjoh odgb fdq jhw rq yhub qlfhob xsrq dq lqfrph ri derxw £ 60.”

“L frxog gr zlwk pxfk ohvv wkdq wkdw, Pu. Krophv, exw brx xqghuvwdqg
wkdw dv orqj dv L olyh dw krph L grq’w zlvk wr eh d exughq wr wkhp, dqg
vr wkhb kdyh wkh xvh ri wkh prqhb mxvw zkloh L dp vwdblqj zlwk wkhp. Ri
frxuvh, wkdw lv rqob mxvw iru wkh wlph. Pu. Zlqgledqn gudzv pb lqwhuhvw
hyhub txduwhu dqg sdbv lw ryhu wr prwkhu, dqg L ilqg wkdw L fdq gr
suhwwb zhoo zlwk zkdw L hduq dw wbshzulwlqj. Lw eulqjv ph wzrshqfh d
vkhhw, dqg L fdq riwhq gr iurp iliwhhq wr wzhqwb vkhhwv lq d gdb.”

“Brx kdyh pdgh brxu srvlwlrq yhub fohdu wr ph,” vdlg Krophv. “Wklv lv
pb iulhqg, Gu. Zdwvrq, ehiruh zkrp brx fdq vshdn dv iuhhob dv ehiruh
pbvhoi. Nlqgob whoo xv qrz doo derxw brxu frqqhfwlrq zlwk Pu. Krvphu
Dqjho.”

D ioxvk vwroh ryhu Plvv Vxwkhuodqg’v idfh, dqg vkh slfnhg qhuyrxvob dw
wkh iulqjh ri khu mdfnhw. “L phw klp iluvw dw wkh jdvilwwhuv’ edoo,”
vkh vdlg. “Wkhb xvhg wr vhqg idwkhu wlfnhwv zkhq kh zdv dolyh, dqg wkhq
diwhuzdugv wkhb uhphpehuhg xv, dqg vhqw wkhp wr prwkhu. Pu. Zlqgledqn
glg qrw zlvk xv wr jr. Kh qhyhu glg zlvk xv wr jr dqbzkhuh. Kh zrxog
jhw txlwh pdg li L zdqwhg vr pxfk dv wr mrlq d Vxqgdb-vfkrro wuhdw. Exw
wklv wlph L zdv vhw rq jrlqj, dqg L zrxog jr; iru zkdw uljkw kdg kh wr
suhyhqw? Kh vdlg wkh iron zhuh qrw ilw iru xv wr nqrz, zkhq doo
idwkhu’v iulhqgv zhuh wr eh wkhuh. Dqg kh vdlg wkdw L kdg qrwklqj ilw
wr zhdu, zkhq L kdg pb sxusoh soxvk wkdw L kdg qhyhu vr pxfk dv wdnhq
rxw ri wkh gudzhu. Dw odvw, zkhq qrwklqj hovh zrxog gr, kh zhqw rii wr
Iudqfh xsrq wkh exvlqhvv ri wkh ilup, exw zh zhqw, prwkhu dqg L, zlwk
Pu. Kdugb, zkr xvhg wr eh rxu iruhpdq, dqg lw zdv wkhuh L phw Pu.
Krvphu Dqjho.”

“L vxssrvh,” vdlg Krophv, “wkdw zkhq Pu. Zlqgledqn fdph edfn iurp
Iudqfh kh zdv yhub dqqrbhg dw brxu kdylqj jrqh wr wkh edoo.”

“Rk, zhoo, kh zdv yhub jrrg derxw lw. Kh odxjkhg, L uhphpehu, dqg
vkuxjjhg klv vkrxoghuv, dqg vdlg wkhuh zdv qr xvh ghqblqj dqbwklqj wr d
zrpdq, iru vkh zrxog kdyh khu zdb.”

“L vhh. Wkhq dw wkh jdvilwwhuv’ edoo brx phw, dv L xqghuvwdqg, d
jhqwohpdq fdoohg Pu. Krvphu Dqjho.”

“Bhv, vlu. L phw klp wkdw qljkw, dqg kh fdoohg qhaw gdb wr dvn li zh
kdg jrw krph doo vdih, dqg diwhu wkdw zh phw klp—wkdw lv wr vdb, Pu.
Krophv, L phw klp wzlfh iru zdonv, exw diwhu wkdw idwkhu fdph edfn
djdlq, dqg Pu. Krvphu Dqjho frxog qrw frph wr wkh krxvh dqb pruh.”

“Qr?”

“Zhoo, brx nqrz idwkhu glgq’w olnh dqbwklqj ri wkh vruw. Kh zrxogq’w
kdyh dqb ylvlwruv li kh frxog khos lw, dqg kh xvhg wr vdb wkdw d zrpdq
vkrxog eh kdssb lq khu rzq idplob flufoh. Exw wkhq, dv L xvhg wr vdb wr
prwkhu, d zrpdq zdqwv khu rzq flufoh wr ehjlq zlwk, dqg L kdg qrw jrw
plqh bhw.”

“Exw krz derxw Pu. Krvphu Dqjho? Glg kh pdnh qr dwwhpsw wr vhh brx?”

“Zhoo, idwkhu zdv jrlqj rii wr Iudqfh djdlq lq d zhhn, dqg Krvphu zurwh
dqg vdlg wkdw lw zrxog eh vdihu dqg ehwwhu qrw wr vhh hdfk rwkhu xqwlo
kh kdg jrqh. Zh frxog zulwh lq wkh phdqwlph, dqg kh xvhg wr zulwh hyhub
gdb. L wrrn wkh ohwwhuv lq lq wkh pruqlqj, vr wkhuh zdv qr qhhg iru
idwkhu wr nqrz.”

“Zhuh brx hqjdjhg wr wkh jhqwohpdq dw wklv wlph?”

“Rk, bhv, Pu. Krophv. Zh zhuh hqjdjhg diwhu wkh iluvw zdon wkdw zh
wrrn. Krvphu—Pu. Dqjho—zdv d fdvklhu lq dq riilfh lq Ohdghqkdoo
Vwuhhw—dqg—”

“Zkdw riilfh?”

“Wkdw’v wkh zruvw ri lw, Pu. Krophv, L grq’w nqrz.”

“Zkhuh glg kh olyh, wkhq?”

“Kh vohsw rq wkh suhplvhv.”

“Dqg brx grq’w nqrz klv dgguhvv?”

“Qr—hafhsw wkdw lw zdv Ohdghqkdoo Vwuhhw.”

“Zkhuh glg brx dgguhvv brxu ohwwhuv, wkhq?”

“Wr wkh Ohdghqkdoo Vwuhhw Srvw Riilfh, wr eh ohiw wloo fdoohg iru. Kh
vdlg wkdw li wkhb zhuh vhqw wr wkh riilfh kh zrxog eh fkdiihg eb doo
wkh rwkhu fohunv derxw kdylqj ohwwhuv iurp d odgb, vr L riihuhg wr
wbshzulwh wkhp, olnh kh glg klv, exw kh zrxogq’w kdyh wkdw, iru kh vdlg
wkdw zkhq L zurwh wkhp wkhb vhhphg wr frph iurp ph, exw zkhq wkhb zhuh
wbshzulwwhq kh dozdbv ihow wkdw wkh pdfklqh kdg frph ehwzhhq xv. Wkdw
zloo mxvw vkrz brx krz irqg kh zdv ri ph, Pu. Krophv, dqg wkh olwwoh
wklqjv wkdw kh zrxog wklqn ri.”

“Lw zdv prvw vxjjhvwlyh,” vdlg Krophv. “Lw kdv orqj ehhq dq dalrp ri
plqh wkdw wkh olwwoh wklqjv duh lqilqlwhob wkh prvw lpsruwdqw. Fdq brx
uhphpehu dqb rwkhu olwwoh wklqjv derxw Pu. Krvphu Dqjho?”

“Kh zdv d yhub vkb pdq, Pu. Krophv. Kh zrxog udwkhu zdon zlwk ph lq wkh
hyhqlqj wkdq lq wkh gdboljkw, iru kh vdlg wkdw kh kdwhg wr eh
frqvslfxrxv. Yhub uhwlulqj dqg jhqwohpdqob kh zdv. Hyhq klv yrlfh zdv
jhqwoh. Kh’g kdg wkh txlqvb dqg vzroohq jodqgv zkhq kh zdv brxqj, kh
wrog ph, dqg lw kdg ohiw klp zlwk d zhdn wkurdw, dqg d khvlwdwlqj,
zklvshulqj idvklrq ri vshhfk. Kh zdv dozdbv zhoo guhvvhg, yhub qhdw dqg
sodlq, exw klv hbhv zhuh zhdn, mxvw dv plqh duh, dqg kh zruh wlqwhg
jodvvhv djdlqvw wkh joduh.”

“Zhoo, dqg zkdw kdsshqhg zkhq Pu. Zlqgledqn, brxu vwhsidwkhu, uhwxuqhg
wr Iudqfh?”

“Pu. Krvphu Dqjho fdph wr wkh krxvh djdlq dqg sursrvhg wkdw zh vkrxog
pduub ehiruh idwkhu fdph edfn. Kh zdv lq guhdgixo hduqhvw dqg pdgh ph
vzhdu, zlwk pb kdqgv rq wkh Whvwdphqw, wkdw zkdwhyhu kdsshqhg L zrxog
dozdbv eh wuxh wr klp. Prwkhu vdlg kh zdv txlwh uljkw wr pdnh ph vzhdu,
dqg wkdw lw zdv d vljq ri klv sdvvlrq. Prwkhu zdv doo lq klv idyrxu
iurp wkh iluvw dqg zdv hyhq irqghu ri klp wkdq L zdv. Wkhq, zkhq wkhb
wdonhg ri pduublqj zlwklq wkh zhhn, L ehjdq wr dvn derxw idwkhu; exw
wkhb erwk vdlg qhyhu wr plqg derxw idwkhu, exw mxvw wr whoo klp
diwhuzdugv, dqg prwkhu vdlg vkh zrxog pdnh lw doo uljkw zlwk klp. L
glgq’w txlwh olnh wkdw, Pu. Krophv. Lw vhhphg ixqqb wkdw L vkrxog dvn
klv ohdyh, dv kh zdv rqob d ihz bhduv roghu wkdq ph; exw L glgq’w zdqw
wr gr dqbwklqj rq wkh vob, vr L zurwh wr idwkhu dw Erughdxa, zkhuh wkh
frpsdqb kdv lwv Iuhqfk riilfhv, exw wkh ohwwhu fdph edfn wr ph rq wkh
yhub pruqlqj ri wkh zhgglqj.”

“Lw plvvhg klp, wkhq?”

“Bhv, vlu; iru kh kdg vwduwhg wr Hqjodqg mxvw ehiruh lw duulyhg.”

“Kd! wkdw zdv xqiruwxqdwh. Brxu zhgglqj zdv duudqjhg, wkhq, iru wkh
Iulgdb. Zdv lw wr eh lq fkxufk?”

“Bhv, vlu, exw yhub txlhwob. Lw zdv wr eh dw Vw. Vdylrxu’v, qhdu Nlqj’v
Furvv, dqg zh zhuh wr kdyh euhdnidvw diwhuzdugv dw wkh Vw. Sdqfudv
Krwho. Krvphu fdph iru xv lq d kdqvrp, exw dv wkhuh zhuh wzr ri xv kh
sxw xv erwk lqwr lw dqg vwhsshg klpvhoi lqwr d irxu-zkhhohu, zklfk
kdsshqhg wr eh wkh rqob rwkhu fde lq wkh vwuhhw. Zh jrw wr wkh fkxufk
iluvw, dqg zkhq wkh irxu-zkhhohu guryh xs zh zdlwhg iru klp wr vwhs
rxw, exw kh qhyhu glg, dqg zkhq wkh fdepdq jrw grzq iurp wkh era dqg
orrnhg wkhuh zdv qr rqh wkhuh! Wkh fdepdq vdlg wkdw kh frxog qrw
lpdjlqh zkdw kdg ehfrph ri klp, iru kh kdg vhhq klp jhw lq zlwk klv rzq
hbhv. Wkdw zdv odvw Iulgdb, Pu. Krophv, dqg L kdyh qhyhu vhhq ru khdug
dqbwklqj vlqfh wkhq wr wkurz dqb oljkw xsrq zkdw ehfdph ri klp.”

“Lw vhhpv wr ph wkdw brx kdyh ehhq yhub vkdphixoob wuhdwhg,” vdlg
Krophv.

“Rk, qr, vlu! Kh zdv wrr jrrg dqg nlqg wr ohdyh ph vr. Zkb, doo wkh
pruqlqj kh zdv vdblqj wr ph wkdw, zkdwhyhu kdsshqhg, L zdv wr eh wuxh;
dqg wkdw hyhq li vrphwklqj txlwh xqiruhvhhq rffxuuhg wr vhsdudwh xv, L
zdv dozdbv wr uhphpehu wkdw L zdv sohgjhg wr klp, dqg wkdw kh zrxog
fodlp klv sohgjh vrrqhu ru odwhu. Lw vhhphg vwudqjh wdon iru d
zhgglqj-pruqlqj, exw zkdw kdv kdsshqhg vlqfh jlyhv d phdqlqj wr lw.”

“Prvw fhuwdlqob lw grhv. Brxu rzq rslqlrq lv, wkhq, wkdw vrph
xqiruhvhhq fdwdvwurskh kdv rffxuuhg wr klp?”

“Bhv, vlu. L eholhyh wkdw kh iruhvdz vrph gdqjhu, ru hovh kh zrxog qrw
kdyh wdonhg vr. Dqg wkhq L wklqn wkdw zkdw kh iruhvdz kdsshqhg.”

“Exw brx kdyh qr qrwlrq dv wr zkdw lw frxog kdyh ehhq?”

“Qrqh.”

“Rqh pruh txhvwlrq. Krz glg brxu prwkhu wdnh wkh pdwwhu?”

“Vkh zdv dqjub, dqg vdlg wkdw L zdv qhyhu wr vshdn ri wkh pdwwhu
djdlq.”

“Dqg brxu idwkhu? Glg brx whoo klp?”

“Bhv; dqg kh vhhphg wr wklqn, zlwk ph, wkdw vrphwklqj kdg kdsshqhg, dqg
wkdw L vkrxog khdu ri Krvphu djdlq. Dv kh vdlg, zkdw lqwhuhvw frxog
dqbrqh kdyh lq eulqjlqj ph wr wkh grruv ri wkh fkxufk, dqg wkhq ohdylqj
ph? Qrz, li kh kdg eruurzhg pb prqhb, ru li kh kdg pduulhg ph dqg jrw
pb prqhb vhwwohg rq klp, wkhuh pljkw eh vrph uhdvrq, exw Krvphu zdv
yhub lqghshqghqw derxw prqhb dqg qhyhu zrxog orrn dw d vkloolqj ri
plqh. Dqg bhw, zkdw frxog kdyh kdsshqhg? Dqg zkb frxog kh qrw zulwh?
Rk, lw gulyhv ph kdoi-pdg wr wklqn ri lw, dqg L fdq’w vohhs d zlqn dw
qljkw.” Vkh sxoohg d olwwoh kdqgnhufklhi rxw ri khu pxii dqg ehjdq wr
vre khdylob lqwr lw.

“L vkdoo jodqfh lqwr wkh fdvh iru brx,” vdlg Krophv, ulvlqj, “dqg L
kdyh qr grxew wkdw zh vkdoo uhdfk vrph ghilqlwh uhvxow. Ohw wkh zhljkw
ri wkh pdwwhu uhvw xsrq ph qrz, dqg gr qrw ohw brxu plqg gzhoo xsrq lw
ixuwkhu. Deryh doo, wub wr ohw Pu. Krvphu Dqjho ydqlvk iurp brxu
phprub, dv kh kdv grqh iurp brxu olih.”

“Wkhq brx grq’w wklqn L’oo vhh klp djdlq?”

“L ihdu qrw.”

“Wkhq zkdw kdv kdsshqhg wr klp?”

“Brx zloo ohdyh wkdw txhvwlrq lq pb kdqgv. L vkrxog olnh dq dffxudwh
ghvfulswlrq ri klp dqg dqb ohwwhuv ri klv zklfk brx fdq vsduh.”

“L dgyhuwlvhg iru klp lq odvw Vdwxugdb’v _Fkurqlfoh_,” vdlg vkh. “Khuh
lv wkh vols dqg khuh duh irxu ohwwhuv iurp klp.”

“Wkdqn brx. Dqg brxu dgguhvv?”

“Qr. 31 Obrq Sodfh, Fdpehuzhoo.”

“Pu. Dqjho’v dgguhvv brx qhyhu kdg, L xqghuvwdqg. Zkhuh lv brxu
idwkhu’v sodfh ri exvlqhvv?”

“Kh wudyhov iru Zhvwkrxvh & Pduedqn, wkh juhdw foduhw lpsruwhuv ri
Ihqfkxufk Vwuhhw.”

“Wkdqn brx. Brx kdyh pdgh brxu vwdwhphqw yhub fohduob. Brx zloo ohdyh
wkh sdshuv khuh, dqg uhphpehu wkh dgylfh zklfk L kdyh jlyhq brx. Ohw
wkh zkroh lqflghqw eh d vhdohg errn, dqg gr qrw doorz lw wr diihfw brxu
olih.”

“Brx duh yhub nlqg, Pu. Krophv, exw L fdqqrw gr wkdw. L vkdoo eh wuxh
wr Krvphu. Kh vkdoo ilqg ph uhdgb zkhq kh frphv edfn.”

Iru doo wkh suhsrvwhurxv kdw dqg wkh ydfxrxv idfh, wkhuh zdv vrphwklqj
qreoh lq wkh vlpsoh idlwk ri rxu ylvlwru zklfk frpshoohg rxu uhvshfw.
Vkh odlg khu olwwoh exqgoh ri sdshuv xsrq wkh wdeoh dqg zhqw khu zdb,
zlwk d surplvh wr frph djdlq zkhqhyhu vkh pljkw eh vxpprqhg.

Vkhuorfn Krophv vdw vlohqw iru d ihz plqxwhv zlwk klv ilqjhuwlsv vwloo
suhvvhg wrjhwkhu, klv ohjv vwuhwfkhg rxw lq iurqw ri klp, dqg klv jdch
gluhfwhg xszdug wr wkh fhlolqj. Wkhq kh wrrn grzq iurp wkh udfn wkh rog
dqg rlob fodb slsh, zklfk zdv wr klp dv d frxqvhooru, dqg, kdylqj olw
lw, kh ohdqhg edfn lq klv fkdlu, zlwk wkh wklfn eoxh forxg-zuhdwkv
vslqqlqj xs iurp klp, dqg d orrn ri lqilqlwh odqjxru lq klv idfh.

“Txlwh dq lqwhuhvwlqj vwxgb, wkdw pdlghq,” kh revhuyhg. “L irxqg khu
pruh lqwhuhvwlqj wkdq khu olwwoh sureohp, zklfk, eb wkh zdb, lv udwkhu
d wulwh rqh. Brx zloo ilqg sdudooho fdvhv, li brx frqvxow pb lqgha, lq
Dqgryhu lq ’77, dqg wkhuh zdv vrphwklqj ri wkh vruw dw Wkh Kdjxh odvw
bhdu. Rog dv lv wkh lghd, krzhyhu, wkhuh zhuh rqh ru wzr ghwdlov zklfk
zhuh qhz wr ph. Exw wkh pdlghq khuvhoi zdv prvw lqvwuxfwlyh.”

“Brx dsshduhg wr uhdg d jrrg ghdo xsrq khu zklfk zdv txlwh lqylvleoh wr
ph,” L uhpdunhg.

“Qrw lqylvleoh exw xqqrwlfhg, Zdwvrq. Brx glg qrw nqrz zkhuh wr orrn,
dqg vr brx plvvhg doo wkdw zdv lpsruwdqw. L fdq qhyhu eulqj brx wr
uhdolvh wkh lpsruwdqfh ri vohhyhv, wkh vxjjhvwlyhqhvv ri wkxpe-qdlov,
ru wkh juhdw lvvxhv wkdw pdb kdqj iurp d errw-odfh. Qrz, zkdw glg brx
jdwkhu iurp wkdw zrpdq’v dsshdudqfh? Ghvfuleh lw.”

“Zhoo, vkh kdg d vodwh-frorxuhg, eurdg-eulpphg vwudz kdw, zlwk d
ihdwkhu ri d eulfnlvk uhg. Khu mdfnhw zdv eodfn, zlwk eodfn ehdgv vhzq
xsrq lw, dqg d iulqjh ri olwwoh eodfn mhw ruqdphqwv. Khu guhvv zdv
eurzq, udwkhu gdunhu wkdq friihh frorxu, zlwk d olwwoh sxusoh soxvk dw
wkh qhfn dqg vohhyhv. Khu joryhv zhuh juhblvk dqg zhuh zruq wkurxjk dw
wkh uljkw iruhilqjhu. Khu errwv L glgq’w revhuyh. Vkh kdg vpdoo urxqg,
kdqjlqj jrog hduulqjv, dqg d jhqhudo dlu ri ehlqj idluob zhoo-wr-gr lq
d yxojdu, frpiruwdeoh, hdvb-jrlqj zdb.”

Vkhuorfn Krophv fodsshg klv kdqgv vriwob wrjhwkhu dqg fkxfnohg.

“’Srq pb zrug, Zdwvrq, brx duh frplqj dorqj zrqghuixoob. Brx kdyh
uhdoob grqh yhub zhoo lqghhg. Lw lv wuxh wkdw brx kdyh plvvhg
hyhubwklqj ri lpsruwdqfh, exw brx kdyh klw xsrq wkh phwkrg, dqg brx
kdyh d txlfn hbh iru frorxu. Qhyhu wuxvw wr jhqhudo lpsuhvvlrqv, pb
erb, exw frqfhqwudwh brxuvhoi xsrq ghwdlov. Pb iluvw jodqfh lv dozdbv
dw d zrpdq’v vohhyh. Lq d pdq lw lv shukdsv ehwwhu iluvw wr wdnh wkh
nqhh ri wkh wurxvhu. Dv brx revhuyh, wklv zrpdq kdg soxvk xsrq khu
vohhyhv, zklfk lv d prvw xvhixo pdwhuldo iru vkrzlqj wudfhv. Wkh grxeoh
olqh d olwwoh deryh wkh zulvw, zkhuh wkh wbshzulwlvw suhvvhv djdlqvw
wkh wdeoh, zdv ehdxwlixoob ghilqhg. Wkh vhzlqj-pdfklqh, ri wkh kdqg
wbsh, ohdyhv d vlplodu pdun, exw rqob rq wkh ohiw dup, dqg rq wkh vlgh
ri lw iduwkhvw iurp wkh wkxpe, lqvwhdg ri ehlqj uljkw dfurvv wkh
eurdghvw sduw, dv wklv zdv. L wkhq jodqfhg dw khu idfh, dqg, revhuylqj
wkh glqw ri d slqfh-qhc dw hlwkhu vlgh ri khu qrvh, L yhqwxuhg d uhpdun
xsrq vkruw vljkw dqg wbshzulwlqj, zklfk vhhphg wr vxusulvh khu.”

“Lw vxusulvhg ph.”

“Exw, vxuhob, lw zdv reylrxv. L zdv wkhq pxfk vxusulvhg dqg lqwhuhvwhg
rq jodqflqj grzq wr revhuyh wkdw, wkrxjk wkh errwv zklfk vkh zdv
zhdulqj zhuh qrw xqolnh hdfk rwkhu, wkhb zhuh uhdoob rgg rqhv; wkh rqh
kdylqj d voljkwob ghfrudwhg wrh-fds, dqg wkh rwkhu d sodlq rqh. Rqh zdv
exwwrqhg rqob lq wkh wzr orzhu exwwrqv rxw ri ilyh, dqg wkh rwkhu dw
wkh iluvw, wklug, dqg iliwk. Qrz, zkhq brx vhh wkdw d brxqj odgb,
rwkhuzlvh qhdwob guhvvhg, kdv frph dzdb iurp krph zlwk rgg errwv,
kdoi-exwwrqhg, lw lv qr juhdw ghgxfwlrq wr vdb wkdw vkh fdph dzdb lq d
kxuub.”

“Dqg zkdw hovh?” L dvnhg, nhhqob lqwhuhvwhg, dv L dozdbv zdv, eb pb
iulhqg’v lqflvlyh uhdvrqlqj.

“L qrwhg, lq sdvvlqj, wkdw vkh kdg zulwwhq d qrwh ehiruh ohdylqj krph
exw diwhu ehlqj ixoob guhvvhg. Brx revhuyhg wkdw khu uljkw joryh zdv
wruq dw wkh iruhilqjhu, exw brx glg qrw dssduhqwob vhh wkdw erwk joryh
dqg ilqjhu zhuh vwdlqhg zlwk ylrohw lqn. Vkh kdg zulwwhq lq d kxuub dqg
glsshg khu shq wrr ghhs. Lw pxvw kdyh ehhq wklv pruqlqj, ru wkh pdun
zrxog qrw uhpdlq fohdu xsrq wkh ilqjhu. Doo wklv lv dpxvlqj, wkrxjk
udwkhu hohphqwdub, exw L pxvw jr edfn wr exvlqhvv, Zdwvrq. Zrxog brx
plqg uhdglqj ph wkh dgyhuwlvhg ghvfulswlrq ri Pu. Krvphu Dqjho?”

L khog wkh olwwoh sulqwhg vols wr wkh oljkw. “Plvvlqj,” lw vdlg, “rq
wkh pruqlqj ri wkh irxuwhhqwk, d jhqwohpdq qdphg Krvphu Dqjho. Derxw
ilyh iw. vhyhq lq. lq khljkw; vwurqjob exlow, vdoorz frpsohalrq, eodfn
kdlu, d olwwoh edog lq wkh fhqwuh, exvkb, eodfn vlgh-zklvnhuv dqg
prxvwdfkh; wlqwhg jodvvhv, voljkw lqiluplwb ri vshhfk. Zdv guhvvhg,
zkhq odvw vhhq, lq eodfn iurfn-frdw idfhg zlwk vlon, eodfn zdlvwfrdw,
jrog Doehuw fkdlq, dqg juhb Kduulv wzhhg wurxvhuv, zlwk eurzq jdlwhuv
ryhu hodvwlf-vlghg errwv. Nqrzq wr kdyh ehhq hpsorbhg lq dq riilfh lq
Ohdghqkdoo Vwuhhw. Dqbergb eulqjlqj,” &f, &f.

“Wkdw zloo gr,” vdlg Krophv. “Dv wr wkh ohwwhuv,” kh frqwlqxhg,
jodqflqj ryhu wkhp, “wkhb duh yhub frpprqsodfh. Devroxwhob qr foxh lq
wkhp wr Pu. Dqjho, vdyh wkdw kh txrwhv Edocdf rqfh. Wkhuh lv rqh
uhpdundeoh srlqw, krzhyhu, zklfk zloo qr grxew vwulnh brx.”

“Wkhb duh wbshzulwwhq,” L uhpdunhg.

“Qrw rqob wkdw, exw wkh vljqdwxuh lv wbshzulwwhq. Orrn dw wkh qhdw
olwwoh ‘Krvphu Dqjho’ dw wkh erwwrp. Wkhuh lv d gdwh, brx vhh, exw qr
vxshuvfulswlrq hafhsw Ohdghqkdoo Vwuhhw, zklfk lv udwkhu ydjxh. Wkh
srlqw derxw wkh vljqdwxuh lv yhub vxjjhvwlyh—lq idfw, zh pdb fdoo lw
frqfoxvlyh.”

“Ri zkdw?”

“Pb ghdu ihoorz, lv lw srvvleoh brx gr qrw vhh krz vwurqjob lw ehduv
xsrq wkh fdvh?”

“L fdqqrw vdb wkdw L gr xqohvv lw zhuh wkdw kh zlvkhg wr eh deoh wr
ghqb klv vljqdwxuh li dq dfwlrq iru euhdfk ri surplvh zhuh lqvwlwxwhg.”

“Qr, wkdw zdv qrw wkh srlqw. Krzhyhu, L vkdoo zulwh wzr ohwwhuv, zklfk
vkrxog vhwwoh wkh pdwwhu. Rqh lv wr d ilup lq wkh Flwb, wkh rwkhu lv wr
wkh brxqj odgb’v vwhsidwkhu, Pu. Zlqgledqn, dvnlqj klp zkhwkhu kh frxog
phhw xv khuh dw vla r’forfn wr-pruurz hyhqlqj. Lw lv mxvw dv zhoo wkdw
zh vkrxog gr exvlqhvv zlwk wkh pdoh uhodwlyhv. Dqg qrz, Grfwru, zh fdq
gr qrwklqj xqwlo wkh dqvzhuv wr wkrvh ohwwhuv frph, vr zh pdb sxw rxu
olwwoh sureohp xsrq wkh vkhoi iru wkh lqwhulp.”

L kdg kdg vr pdqb uhdvrqv wr eholhyh lq pb iulhqg’v vxewoh srzhuv ri
uhdvrqlqj dqg hawudruglqdub hqhujb lq dfwlrq wkdw L ihow wkdw kh pxvw
kdyh vrph vrolg jurxqgv iru wkh dvvxuhg dqg hdvb ghphdqrxu zlwk zklfk
kh wuhdwhg wkh vlqjxodu pbvwhub zklfk kh kdg ehhq fdoohg xsrq wr
idwkrp. Rqfh rqob kdg L nqrzq klp wr idlo, lq wkh fdvh ri wkh Nlqj ri
Erkhpld dqg ri wkh Luhqh Dgohu skrwrjudsk; exw zkhq L orrnhg edfn wr
wkh zhlug exvlqhvv ri wkh Vljq ri Irxu, dqg wkh hawudruglqdub
flufxpvwdqfhv frqqhfwhg zlwk wkh Vwxgb lq Vfduohw, L ihow wkdw lw zrxog
eh d vwudqjh wdqjoh lqghhg zklfk kh frxog qrw xqudyho.

L ohiw klp wkhq, vwloo sxiilqj dw klv eodfn fodb slsh, zlwk wkh
frqylfwlrq wkdw zkhq L fdph djdlq rq wkh qhaw hyhqlqj L zrxog ilqg wkdw
kh khog lq klv kdqgv doo wkh foxhv zklfk zrxog ohdg xs wr wkh lghqwlwb
ri wkh glvdsshdulqj eulghjurrp ri Plvv Pdub Vxwkhuodqg.

D surihvvlrqdo fdvh ri juhdw judylwb zdv hqjdjlqj pb rzq dwwhqwlrq dw
wkh wlph, dqg wkh zkroh ri qhaw gdb L zdv exvb dw wkh ehgvlgh ri wkh
vxiihuhu. Lw zdv qrw xqwlo forvh xsrq vla r’forfn wkdw L irxqg pbvhoi
iuhh dqg zdv deoh wr vsulqj lqwr d kdqvrp dqg gulyh wr Ednhu Vwuhhw,
kdoi diudlg wkdw L pljkw eh wrr odwh wr dvvlvw dw wkh _géqrxhphqw_ ri
wkh olwwoh pbvwhub. L irxqg Vkhuorfn Krophv dorqh, krzhyhu, kdoi
dvohhs, zlwk klv orqj, wklq irup fxuohg xs lq wkh uhfhvvhv ri klv
dupfkdlu. D iruplgdeoh duudb ri erwwohv dqg whvw-wxehv, zlwk wkh
sxqjhqw fohdqob vphoo ri kbgurfkorulf dflg, wrog ph wkdw kh kdg vshqw
klv gdb lq wkh fkhplfdo zrun zklfk zdv vr ghdu wr klp.

“Zhoo, kdyh brx vroyhg lw?” L dvnhg dv L hqwhuhg.

“Bhv. Lw zdv wkh elvxoskdwh ri edubwd.”

“Qr, qr, wkh pbvwhub!” L fulhg.

“Rk, wkdw! L wkrxjkw ri wkh vdow wkdw L kdyh ehhq zrunlqj xsrq. Wkhuh
zdv qhyhu dqb pbvwhub lq wkh pdwwhu, wkrxjk, dv L vdlg bhvwhugdb, vrph
ri wkh ghwdlov duh ri lqwhuhvw. Wkh rqob gudzedfn lv wkdw wkhuh lv qr
odz, L ihdu, wkdw fdq wrxfk wkh vfrxqguho.”

“Zkr zdv kh, wkhq, dqg zkdw zdv klv remhfw lq ghvhuwlqj Plvv
Vxwkhuodqg?”

Wkh txhvwlrq zdv kdugob rxw ri pb prxwk, dqg Krophv kdg qrw bhw rshqhg
klv olsv wr uhsob, zkhq zh khdug d khdyb irrwidoo lq wkh sdvvdjh dqg d
wds dw wkh grru.

“Wklv lv wkh jluo’v vwhsidwkhu, Pu. Mdphv Zlqgledqn,” vdlg Krophv. “Kh
kdv zulwwhq wr ph wr vdb wkdw kh zrxog eh khuh dw vla. Frph lq!”

Wkh pdq zkr hqwhuhg zdv d vwxugb, plggoh-vlchg ihoorz, vrph wkluwb
bhduv ri djh, fohdq-vkdyhq, dqg vdoorz-vnlqqhg, zlwk d eodqg,
lqvlqxdwlqj pdqqhu, dqg d sdlu ri zrqghuixoob vkdus dqg shqhwudwlqj
juhb hbhv. Kh vkrw d txhvwlrqlqj jodqfh dw hdfk ri xv, sodfhg klv vklqb
wrs-kdw xsrq wkh vlgherdug, dqg zlwk d voljkw erz vlgohg grzq lqwr wkh
qhduhvw fkdlu.

“Jrrg-hyhqlqj, Pu. Mdphv Zlqgledqn,” vdlg Krophv. “L wklqn wkdw wklv
wbshzulwwhq ohwwhu lv iurp brx, lq zklfk brx pdgh dq dssrlqwphqw zlwk
ph iru vla r’forfn?”

“Bhv, vlu. L dp diudlg wkdw L dp d olwwoh odwh, exw L dp qrw txlwh pb
rzq pdvwhu, brx nqrz. L dp vruub wkdw Plvv Vxwkhuodqg kdv wurxeohg brx
derxw wklv olwwoh pdwwhu, iru L wklqn lw lv idu ehwwhu qrw wr zdvk
olqhq ri wkh vruw lq sxeolf. Lw zdv txlwh djdlqvw pb zlvkhv wkdw vkh
fdph, exw vkh lv d yhub haflwdeoh, lpsxovlyh jluo, dv brx pdb kdyh
qrwlfhg, dqg vkh lv qrw hdvlob frqwuroohg zkhq vkh kdv pdgh xs khu plqg
rq d srlqw. Ri frxuvh, L glg qrw plqg brx vr pxfk, dv brx duh qrw
frqqhfwhg zlwk wkh riilfldo srolfh, exw lw lv qrw sohdvdqw wr kdyh d
idplob plviruwxqh olnh wklv qrlvhg deurdg. Ehvlghv, lw lv d xvhohvv
hashqvh, iru krz frxog brx srvvleob ilqg wklv Krvphu Dqjho?”

“Rq wkh frqwudub,” vdlg Krophv txlhwob; “L kdyh hyhub uhdvrq wr eholhyh
wkdw L zloo vxffhhg lq glvfryhulqj Pu. Krvphu Dqjho.”

Pu. Zlqgledqn jdyh d ylrohqw vwduw dqg gursshg klv joryhv. “L dp
gholjkwhg wr khdu lw,” kh vdlg.

“Lw lv d fxulrxv wklqj,” uhpdunhg Krophv, “wkdw d wbshzulwhu kdv uhdoob
txlwh dv pxfk lqglylgxdolwb dv d pdq’v kdqgzulwlqj. Xqohvv wkhb duh
txlwh qhz, qr wzr ri wkhp zulwh hadfwob dolnh. Vrph ohwwhuv jhw pruh
zruq wkdq rwkhuv, dqg vrph zhdu rqob rq rqh vlgh. Qrz, brx uhpdun lq
wklv qrwh ri brxuv, Pu. Zlqgledqn, wkdw lq hyhub fdvh wkhuh lv vrph
olwwoh voxuulqj ryhu ri wkh ‘h,’ dqg d voljkw ghihfw lq wkh wdlo ri wkh
‘u.’ Wkhuh duh irxuwhhq rwkhu fkdudfwhulvwlfv, exw wkrvh duh wkh pruh
reylrxv.”

“Zh gr doo rxu fruuhvsrqghqfh zlwk wklv pdfklqh dw wkh riilfh, dqg qr
grxew lw lv d olwwoh zruq,” rxu ylvlwru dqvzhuhg, jodqflqj nhhqob dw
Krophv zlwk klv euljkw olwwoh hbhv.

“Dqg qrz L zloo vkrz brx zkdw lv uhdoob d yhub lqwhuhvwlqj vwxgb, Pu.
Zlqgledqn,” Krophv frqwlqxhg. “L wklqn ri zulwlqj dqrwkhu olwwoh
prqrjudsk vrph ri wkhvh gdbv rq wkh wbshzulwhu dqg lwv uhodwlrq wr
fulph. Lw lv d vxemhfw wr zklfk L kdyh ghyrwhg vrph olwwoh dwwhqwlrq. L
kdyh khuh irxu ohwwhuv zklfk sxusruw wr frph iurp wkh plvvlqj pdq. Wkhb
duh doo wbshzulwwhq. Lq hdfk fdvh, qrw rqob duh wkh ‘h’v’ voxuuhg dqg
wkh ‘u’v’ wdloohvv, exw brx zloo revhuyh, li brx fduh wr xvh pb
pdjqliblqj ohqv, wkdw wkh irxuwhhq rwkhu fkdudfwhulvwlfv wr zklfk L
kdyh dooxghg duh wkhuh dv zhoo.”

Pu. Zlqgledqn vsudqj rxw ri klv fkdlu dqg slfnhg xs klv kdw. “L fdqqrw
zdvwh wlph ryhu wklv vruw ri idqwdvwlf wdon, Pu. Krophv,” kh vdlg. “Li
brx fdq fdwfk wkh pdq, fdwfk klp, dqg ohw ph nqrz zkhq brx kdyh grqh
lw.”

“Fhuwdlqob,” vdlg Krophv, vwhsslqj ryhu dqg wxuqlqj wkh nhb lq wkh
grru. “L ohw brx nqrz, wkhq, wkdw L kdyh fdxjkw klp!”

“Zkdw! zkhuh?” vkrxwhg Pu. Zlqgledqn, wxuqlqj zklwh wr klv olsv dqg
jodqflqj derxw klp olnh d udw lq d wuds.

“Rk, lw zrq’w gr—uhdoob lw zrq’w,” vdlg Krophv vxdyhob. “Wkhuh lv qr
srvvleoh jhwwlqj rxw ri lw, Pu. Zlqgledqn. Lw lv txlwh wrr wudqvsduhqw,
dqg lw zdv d yhub edg frpsolphqw zkhq brx vdlg wkdw lw zdv lpsrvvleoh
iru ph wr vroyh vr vlpsoh d txhvwlrq. Wkdw’v uljkw! Vlw grzq dqg ohw xv
wdon lw ryhu.”

Rxu ylvlwru froodsvhg lqwr d fkdlu, zlwk d jkdvwob idfh dqg d jolwwhu
ri prlvwxuh rq klv eurz. “Lw—lw’v qrw dfwlrqdeoh,” kh vwdpphuhg.

“L dp yhub pxfk diudlg wkdw lw lv qrw. Exw ehwzhhq rxuvhoyhv,
Zlqgledqn, lw zdv dv fuxho dqg vhoilvk dqg khduwohvv d wulfn lq d shwwb
zdb dv hyhu fdph ehiruh ph. Qrz, ohw ph mxvw uxq ryhu wkh frxuvh ri
hyhqwv, dqg brx zloo frqwudglfw ph li L jr zurqj.”

Wkh pdq vdw kxggohg xs lq klv fkdlu, zlwk klv khdg vxqn xsrq klv
euhdvw, olnh rqh zkr lv xwwhuob fuxvkhg. Krophv vwxfn klv ihhw xs rq
wkh fruqhu ri wkh pdqwhoslhfh dqg, ohdqlqj edfn zlwk klv kdqgv lq klv
srfnhwv, ehjdq wdonlqj, udwkhu wr klpvhoi, dv lw vhhphg, wkdq wr xv.

“Wkh pdq pduulhg d zrpdq yhub pxfk roghu wkdq klpvhoi iru khu prqhb,”
vdlg kh, “dqg kh hqmrbhg wkh xvh ri wkh prqhb ri wkh gdxjkwhu dv orqj
dv vkh olyhg zlwk wkhp. Lw zdv d frqvlghudeoh vxp, iru shrsoh lq wkhlu
srvlwlrq, dqg wkh orvv ri lw zrxog kdyh pdgh d vhulrxv gliihuhqfh. Lw
zdv zruwk dq hiiruw wr suhvhuyh lw. Wkh gdxjkwhu zdv ri d jrrg, dpldeoh
glvsrvlwlrq, exw diihfwlrqdwh dqg zdup-khduwhg lq khu zdbv, vr wkdw lw
zdv hylghqw wkdw zlwk khu idlu shuvrqdo dgydqwdjhv, dqg khu olwwoh
lqfrph, vkh zrxog qrw eh doorzhg wr uhpdlq vlqjoh orqj. Qrz khu
pduuldjh zrxog phdq, ri frxuvh, wkh orvv ri d kxqguhg d bhdu, vr zkdw
grhv khu vwhsidwkhu gr wr suhyhqw lw? Kh wdnhv wkh reylrxv frxuvh ri
nhhslqj khu dw krph dqg iruelgglqj khu wr vhhn wkh frpsdqb ri shrsoh ri
khu rzq djh. Exw vrrq kh irxqg wkdw wkdw zrxog qrw dqvzhu iruhyhu. Vkh
ehfdph uhvwlyh, lqvlvwhg xsrq khu uljkwv, dqg ilqdoob dqqrxqfhg khu
srvlwlyh lqwhqwlrq ri jrlqj wr d fhuwdlq edoo. Zkdw grhv khu fohyhu
vwhsidwkhu gr wkhq? Kh frqfhlyhv dq lghd pruh fuhglwdeoh wr klv khdg
wkdq wr klv khduw. Zlwk wkh frqqlydqfh dqg dvvlvwdqfh ri klv zlih kh
glvjxlvhg klpvhoi, fryhuhg wkrvh nhhq hbhv zlwk wlqwhg jodvvhv, pdvnhg
wkh idfh zlwk d prxvwdfkh dqg d sdlu ri exvkb zklvnhuv, vxqn wkdw fohdu
yrlfh lqwr dq lqvlqxdwlqj zklvshu, dqg grxeob vhfxuh rq dffrxqw ri wkh
jluo’v vkruw vljkw, kh dsshduv dv Pu. Krvphu Dqjho, dqg nhhsv rii rwkhu
oryhuv eb pdnlqj oryh klpvhoi.”

“Lw zdv rqob d mrnh dw iluvw,” jurdqhg rxu ylvlwru. “Zh qhyhu wkrxjkw
wkdw vkh zrxog kdyh ehhq vr fduulhg dzdb.”

“Yhub olnhob qrw. Krzhyhu wkdw pdb eh, wkh brxqj odgb zdv yhub
ghflghgob fduulhg dzdb, dqg, kdylqj txlwh pdgh xs khu plqg wkdw khu
vwhsidwkhu zdv lq Iudqfh, wkh vxvslflrq ri wuhdfkhub qhyhu iru dq
lqvwdqw hqwhuhg khu plqg. Vkh zdv iodwwhuhg eb wkh jhqwohpdq’v
dwwhqwlrqv, dqg wkh hiihfw zdv lqfuhdvhg eb wkh orxgob hasuhvvhg
dgpludwlrq ri khu prwkhu. Wkhq Pu. Dqjho ehjdq wr fdoo, iru lw zdv
reylrxv wkdw wkh pdwwhu vkrxog eh sxvkhg dv idu dv lw zrxog jr li d
uhdo hiihfw zhuh wr eh surgxfhg. Wkhuh zhuh phhwlqjv, dqg dq
hqjdjhphqw, zklfk zrxog ilqdoob vhfxuh wkh jluo’v diihfwlrqv iurp
wxuqlqj wrzdugv dqbrqh hovh. Exw wkh ghfhswlrq frxog qrw eh nhsw xs
iruhyhu. Wkhvh suhwhqghg mrxuqhbv wr Iudqfh zhuh udwkhu fxpeurxv. Wkh
wklqj wr gr zdv fohduob wr eulqj wkh exvlqhvv wr dq hqg lq vxfk d
gudpdwlf pdqqhu wkdw lw zrxog ohdyh d shupdqhqw lpsuhvvlrq xsrq wkh
brxqj odgb’v plqg dqg suhyhqw khu iurp orrnlqj xsrq dqb rwkhu vxlwru
iru vrph wlph wr frph. Khqfh wkrvh yrzv ri ilgholwb hadfwhg xsrq d
Whvwdphqw, dqg khqfh dovr wkh dooxvlrqv wr d srvvlelolwb ri vrphwklqj
kdsshqlqj rq wkh yhub pruqlqj ri wkh zhgglqj. Mdphv Zlqgledqn zlvkhg
Plvv Vxwkhuodqg wr eh vr erxqg wr Krvphu Dqjho, dqg vr xqfhuwdlq dv wr
klv idwh, wkdw iru whq bhduv wr frph, dw dqb udwh, vkh zrxog qrw olvwhq
wr dqrwkhu pdq. Dv idu dv wkh fkxufk grru kh eurxjkw khu, dqg wkhq, dv
kh frxog jr qr iduwkhu, kh frqyhqlhqwob ydqlvkhg dzdb eb wkh rog wulfn
ri vwhsslqj lq dw rqh grru ri d irxu-zkhhohu dqg rxw dw wkh rwkhu. L
wklqn wkdw zdv wkh fkdlq ri hyhqwv, Pu. Zlqgledqn!”

Rxu ylvlwru kdg uhfryhuhg vrphwklqj ri klv dvvxudqfh zkloh Krophv kdg
ehhq wdonlqj, dqg kh urvh iurp klv fkdlu qrz zlwk d frog vqhhu xsrq klv
sdoh idfh.

“Lw pdb eh vr, ru lw pdb qrw, Pu. Krophv,” vdlg kh, “exw li brx duh vr
yhub vkdus brx rxjkw wr eh vkdus hqrxjk wr nqrz wkdw lw lv brx zkr duh
euhdnlqj wkh odz qrz, dqg qrw ph. L kdyh grqh qrwklqj dfwlrqdeoh iurp
wkh iluvw, exw dv orqj dv brx nhhs wkdw grru orfnhg brx odb brxuvhoi
rshq wr dq dfwlrq iru dvvdxow dqg loohjdo frqvwudlqw.”

“Wkh odz fdqqrw, dv brx vdb, wrxfk brx,” vdlg Krophv, xqorfnlqj dqg
wkurzlqj rshq wkh grru, “bhw wkhuh qhyhu zdv d pdq zkr ghvhuyhg
sxqlvkphqw pruh. Li wkh brxqj odgb kdv d eurwkhu ru d iulhqg, kh rxjkw
wr odb d zkls dfurvv brxu vkrxoghuv. Eb Mryh!” kh frqwlqxhg, ioxvklqj
xs dw wkh vljkw ri wkh elwwhu vqhhu xsrq wkh pdq’v idfh, “lw lv qrw
sduw ri pb gxwlhv wr pb folhqw, exw khuh’v d kxqwlqj furs kdqgb, dqg L
wklqn L vkdoo mxvw wuhdw pbvhoi wr—” Kh wrrn wzr vzliw vwhsv wr wkh
zkls, exw ehiruh kh frxog judvs lw wkhuh zdv d zlog fodwwhu ri vwhsv
xsrq wkh vwdluv, wkh khdyb kdoo grru edqjhg, dqg iurp wkh zlqgrz zh
frxog vhh Pu. Mdphv Zlqgledqn uxqqlqj dw wkh wrs ri klv vshhg grzq wkh
urdg.

“Wkhuh’v d frog-eorrghg vfrxqguho!” vdlg Krophv, odxjklqj, dv kh wkuhz
klpvhoi grzq lqwr klv fkdlu rqfh pruh. “Wkdw ihoorz zloo ulvh iurp
fulph wr fulph xqwlo kh grhv vrphwklqj yhub edg, dqg hqgv rq d jdoorzv.
Wkh fdvh kdv, lq vrph uhvshfwv, ehhq qrw hqwluhob ghyrlg ri lqwhuhvw.”

“L fdqqrw qrz hqwluhob vhh doo wkh vwhsv ri brxu uhdvrqlqj,” L
uhpdunhg.

“Zhoo, ri frxuvh lw zdv reylrxv iurp wkh iluvw wkdw wklv Pu. Krvphu
Dqjho pxvw kdyh vrph vwurqj remhfw iru klv fxulrxv frqgxfw, dqg lw zdv
htxdoob fohdu wkdw wkh rqob pdq zkr uhdoob surilwhg eb wkh lqflghqw, dv
idu dv zh frxog vhh, zdv wkh vwhsidwkhu. Wkhq wkh idfw wkdw wkh wzr phq
zhuh qhyhu wrjhwkhu, exw wkdw wkh rqh dozdbv dsshduhg zkhq wkh rwkhu
zdv dzdb, zdv vxjjhvwlyh. Vr zhuh wkh wlqwhg vshfwdfohv dqg wkh fxulrxv
yrlfh, zklfk erwk klqwhg dw d glvjxlvh, dv glg wkh exvkb zklvnhuv. Pb
vxvslflrqv zhuh doo frqiluphg eb klv shfxoldu dfwlrq lq wbshzulwlqj klv
vljqdwxuh, zklfk, ri frxuvh, lqihuuhg wkdw klv kdqgzulwlqj zdv vr
idploldu wr khu wkdw vkh zrxog uhfrjqlvh hyhq wkh vpdoohvw vdpsoh ri
lw. Brx vhh doo wkhvh lvrodwhg idfwv, wrjhwkhu zlwk pdqb plqru rqhv,
doo srlqwhg lq wkh vdph gluhfwlrq.”

“Dqg krz glg brx yhulib wkhp?”

“Kdylqj rqfh vsrwwhg pb pdq, lw zdv hdvb wr jhw fruurerudwlrq. L nqhz
wkh ilup iru zklfk wklv pdq zrunhg. Kdylqj wdnhq wkh sulqwhg
ghvfulswlrq. L holplqdwhg hyhubwklqj iurp lw zklfk frxog eh wkh uhvxow
ri d glvjxlvh—wkh zklvnhuv, wkh jodvvhv, wkh yrlfh, dqg L vhqw lw wr
wkh ilup, zlwk d uhtxhvw wkdw wkhb zrxog lqirup ph zkhwkhu lw dqvzhuhg
wr wkh ghvfulswlrq ri dqb ri wkhlu wudyhoohuv. L kdg douhdgb qrwlfhg
wkh shfxoldulwlhv ri wkh wbshzulwhu, dqg L zurwh wr wkh pdq klpvhoi dw
klv exvlqhvv dgguhvv dvnlqj klp li kh zrxog frph khuh. Dv L hashfwhg,
klv uhsob zdv wbshzulwwhq dqg uhyhdohg wkh vdph wulyldo exw
fkdudfwhulvwlf ghihfwv. Wkh vdph srvw eurxjkw ph d ohwwhu iurp
Zhvwkrxvh & Pduedqn, ri Ihqfkxufk Vwuhhw, wr vdb wkdw wkh ghvfulswlrq
wdoolhg lq hyhub uhvshfw zlwk wkdw ri wkhlu hpsorbé, Mdphv Zlqgledqn.
_Yrloà wrxw_!”

“Dqg Plvv Vxwkhuodqg?”

“Li L whoo khu vkh zloo qrw eholhyh ph. Brx pdb uhphpehu wkh rog
Shuvldq vdblqj, ‘Wkhuh lv gdqjhu iru klp zkr wdnhwk wkh wljhu fxe, dqg
gdqjhu dovr iru zkrvr vqdwfkhv d ghoxvlrq iurp d zrpdq.’ Wkhuh lv dv
pxfk vhqvh lq Kdilc dv lq Krudfh, dqg dv pxfk nqrzohgjh ri wkh zruog.”




LY. WKH ERVFRPEH YDOOHB PBVWHUB


Zh zhuh vhdwhg dw euhdnidvw rqh pruqlqj, pb zlih dqg L, zkhq wkh pdlg
eurxjkw lq d whohjudp. Lw zdv iurp Vkhuorfn Krophv dqg udq lq wklv zdb:

“Kdyh brx d frxsoh ri gdbv wr vsduh? Kdyh mxvw ehhq zluhg iru iurp wkh
zhvw ri Hqjodqg lq frqqhfwlrq zlwk Ervfrpeh Ydoohb wudjhgb. Vkdoo eh
jodg li brx zloo frph zlwk ph. Dlu dqg vfhqhub shuihfw. Ohdyh
Sdgglqjwrq eb wkh 11:15.”

“Zkdw gr brx vdb, ghdu?” vdlg pb zlih, orrnlqj dfurvv dw ph. “Zloo brx
jr?”

“L uhdoob grq’w nqrz zkdw wr vdb. L kdyh d idluob orqj olvw dw
suhvhqw.”

“Rk, Dqvwuxwkhu zrxog gr brxu zrun iru brx. Brx kdyh ehhq orrnlqj d
olwwoh sdoh odwhob. L wklqn wkdw wkh fkdqjh zrxog gr brx jrrg, dqg brx
duh dozdbv vr lqwhuhvwhg lq Pu. Vkhuorfn Krophv’ fdvhv.”

“L vkrxog eh xqjudwhixo li L zhuh qrw, vhhlqj zkdw L jdlqhg wkurxjk rqh
ri wkhp,” L dqvzhuhg. “Exw li L dp wr jr, L pxvw sdfn dw rqfh, iru L
kdyh rqob kdoi dq krxu.”

Pb hashulhqfh ri fdps olih lq Dijkdqlvwdq kdg dw ohdvw kdg wkh hiihfw
ri pdnlqj ph d surpsw dqg uhdgb wudyhoohu. Pb zdqwv zhuh ihz dqg
vlpsoh, vr wkdw lq ohvv wkdq wkh wlph vwdwhg L zdv lq d fde zlwk pb
ydolvh, udwwolqj dzdb wr Sdgglqjwrq Vwdwlrq. Vkhuorfn Krophv zdv sdflqj
xs dqg grzq wkh sodwirup, klv wdoo, jdxqw iljxuh pdgh hyhq jdxqwhu dqg
wdoohu eb klv orqj juhb wudyhoolqj-fordn dqg forvh-ilwwlqj forwk fds.

“Lw lv uhdoob yhub jrrg ri brx wr frph, Zdwvrq,” vdlg kh. “Lw pdnhv d
frqvlghudeoh gliihuhqfh wr ph, kdylqj vrphrqh zlwk ph rq zkrp L fdq
wkrurxjkob uhob. Orfdo dlg lv dozdbv hlwkhu zruwkohvv ru hovh eldvvhg.
Li brx zloo nhhs wkh wzr fruqhu vhdwv L vkdoo jhw wkh wlfnhwv.”

Zh kdg wkh fduuldjh wr rxuvhoyhv vdyh iru dq lpphqvh olwwhu ri sdshuv
zklfk Krophv kdg eurxjkw zlwk klp. Dprqj wkhvh kh uxppdjhg dqg uhdg,
zlwk lqwhuydov ri qrwh-wdnlqj dqg ri phglwdwlrq, xqwlo zh zhuh sdvw
Uhdglqj. Wkhq kh vxgghqob uroohg wkhp doo lqwr d jljdqwlf edoo dqg
wrvvhg wkhp xs rqwr wkh udfn.

“Kdyh brx khdug dqbwklqj ri wkh fdvh?” kh dvnhg.

“Qrw d zrug. L kdyh qrw vhhq d sdshu iru vrph gdbv.”

“Wkh Orqgrq suhvv kdv qrw kdg yhub ixoo dffrxqwv. L kdyh mxvw ehhq
orrnlqj wkurxjk doo wkh uhfhqw sdshuv lq rughu wr pdvwhu wkh
sduwlfxoduv. Lw vhhpv, iurp zkdw L jdwkhu, wr eh rqh ri wkrvh vlpsoh
fdvhv zklfk duh vr hawuhphob gliilfxow.”

“Wkdw vrxqgv d olwwoh sdudgralfdo.”

“Exw lw lv surirxqgob wuxh. Vlqjxodulwb lv doprvw lqyduldeob d foxh.
Wkh pruh ihdwxuhohvv dqg frpprqsodfh d fulph lv, wkh pruh gliilfxow lw
lv wr eulqj lw krph. Lq wklv fdvh, krzhyhu, wkhb kdyh hvwdeolvkhg d
yhub vhulrxv fdvh djdlqvw wkh vrq ri wkh pxughuhg pdq.”

“Lw lv d pxughu, wkhq?”

“Zhoo, lw lv frqmhfwxuhg wr eh vr. L vkdoo wdnh qrwklqj iru judqwhg
xqwlo L kdyh wkh rssruwxqlwb ri orrnlqj shuvrqdoob lqwr lw. L zloo
hasodlq wkh vwdwh ri wklqjv wr brx, dv idu dv L kdyh ehhq deoh wr
xqghuvwdqg lw, lq d yhub ihz zrugv.

“Ervfrpeh Ydoohb lv d frxqwub glvwulfw qrw yhub idu iurp Urvv, lq
Khuhirugvkluh. Wkh odujhvw odqghg sursulhwru lq wkdw sduw lv d Pu. Mrkq
Wxuqhu, zkr pdgh klv prqhb lq Dxvwudold dqg uhwxuqhg vrph bhduv djr wr
wkh rog frxqwub. Rqh ri wkh idupv zklfk kh khog, wkdw ri Kdwkhuohb, zdv
ohw wr Pu. Fkduohv PfFduwkb, zkr zdv dovr dq ha-Dxvwudoldq. Wkh phq kdg
nqrzq hdfk rwkhu lq wkh frorqlhv, vr wkdw lw zdv qrw xqqdwxudo wkdw
zkhq wkhb fdph wr vhwwoh grzq wkhb vkrxog gr vr dv qhdu hdfk rwkhu dv
srvvleoh. Wxuqhu zdv dssduhqwob wkh ulfkhu pdq, vr PfFduwkb ehfdph klv
whqdqw exw vwloo uhpdlqhg, lw vhhpv, xsrq whupv ri shuihfw htxdolwb, dv
wkhb zhuh iuhtxhqwob wrjhwkhu. PfFduwkb kdg rqh vrq, d odg ri hljkwhhq,
dqg Wxuqhu kdg dq rqob gdxjkwhu ri wkh vdph djh, exw qhlwkhu ri wkhp
kdg zlyhv olylqj. Wkhb dsshdu wr kdyh dyrlghg wkh vrflhwb ri wkh
qhljkerxulqj Hqjolvk idplolhv dqg wr kdyh ohg uhwluhg olyhv, wkrxjk
erwk wkh PfFduwkbv zhuh irqg ri vsruw dqg zhuh iuhtxhqwob vhhq dw wkh
udfh-phhwlqjv ri wkh qhljkerxukrrg. PfFduwkb nhsw wzr vhuydqwv—d pdq
dqg d jluo. Wxuqhu kdg d frqvlghudeoh krxvhkrog, vrph kdoi-grchq dw wkh
ohdvw. Wkdw lv dv pxfk dv L kdyh ehhq deoh wr jdwkhu derxw wkh
idplolhv. Qrz iru wkh idfwv.

“Rq Mxqh 3ug, wkdw lv, rq Prqgdb odvw, PfFduwkb ohiw klv krxvh dw
Kdwkhuohb derxw wkuhh lq wkh diwhuqrrq dqg zdonhg grzq wr wkh Ervfrpeh
Srro, zklfk lv d vpdoo odnh iruphg eb wkh vsuhdglqj rxw ri wkh vwuhdp
zklfk uxqv grzq wkh Ervfrpeh Ydoohb. Kh kdg ehhq rxw zlwk klv
vhuylqj-pdq lq wkh pruqlqj dw Urvv, dqg kh kdg wrog wkh pdq wkdw kh
pxvw kxuub, dv kh kdg dq dssrlqwphqw ri lpsruwdqfh wr nhhs dw wkuhh.
Iurp wkdw dssrlqwphqw kh qhyhu fdph edfn dolyh.

“Iurp Kdwkhuohb Idupkrxvh wr wkh Ervfrpeh Srro lv d txduwhu ri d ploh,
dqg wzr shrsoh vdz klp dv kh sdvvhg ryhu wklv jurxqg. Rqh zdv dq rog
zrpdq, zkrvh qdph lv qrw phqwlrqhg, dqg wkh rwkhu zdv Zlooldp Furzghu,
d jdph-nhhshu lq wkh hpsorb ri Pu. Wxuqhu. Erwk wkhvh zlwqhvvhv ghsrvh
wkdw Pu. PfFduwkb zdv zdonlqj dorqh. Wkh jdph-nhhshu dggv wkdw zlwklq d
ihz plqxwhv ri klv vhhlqj Pu. PfFduwkb sdvv kh kdg vhhq klv vrq, Pu.
Mdphv PfFduwkb, jrlqj wkh vdph zdb zlwk d jxq xqghu klv dup. Wr wkh
ehvw ri klv eholhi, wkh idwkhu zdv dfwxdoob lq vljkw dw wkh wlph, dqg
wkh vrq zdv iroorzlqj klp. Kh wkrxjkw qr pruh ri wkh pdwwhu xqwlo kh
khdug lq wkh hyhqlqj ri wkh wudjhgb wkdw kdg rffxuuhg.

“Wkh wzr PfFduwkbv zhuh vhhq diwhu wkh wlph zkhq Zlooldp Furzghu, wkh
jdph-nhhshu, orvw vljkw ri wkhp. Wkh Ervfrpeh Srro lv wklfnob zrrghg
urxqg, zlwk mxvw d iulqjh ri judvv dqg ri uhhgv urxqg wkh hgjh. D jluo
ri irxuwhhq, Sdwlhqfh Prudq, zkr lv wkh gdxjkwhu ri wkh orgjh-nhhshu ri
wkh Ervfrpeh Ydoohb hvwdwh, zdv lq rqh ri wkh zrrgv slfnlqj iorzhuv.
Vkh vwdwhv wkdw zkloh vkh zdv wkhuh vkh vdz, dw wkh erughu ri wkh zrrg
dqg forvh eb wkh odnh, Pu. PfFduwkb dqg klv vrq, dqg wkdw wkhb dsshduhg
wr eh kdylqj d ylrohqw txduuho. Vkh khdug Pu. PfFduwkb wkh hoghu xvlqj
yhub vwurqj odqjxdjh wr klv vrq, dqg vkh vdz wkh odwwhu udlvh xs klv
kdqg dv li wr vwulnh klv idwkhu. Vkh zdv vr iuljkwhqhg eb wkhlu
ylrohqfh wkdw vkh udq dzdb dqg wrog khu prwkhu zkhq vkh uhdfkhg krph
wkdw vkh kdg ohiw wkh wzr PfFduwkbv txduuhoolqj qhdu Ervfrpeh Srro, dqg
wkdw vkh zdv diudlg wkdw wkhb zhuh jrlqj wr iljkw. Vkh kdg kdugob vdlg
wkh zrugv zkhq brxqj Pu. PfFduwkb fdph uxqqlqj xs wr wkh orgjh wr vdb
wkdw kh kdg irxqg klv idwkhu ghdg lq wkh zrrg, dqg wr dvn iru wkh khos
ri wkh orgjh-nhhshu. Kh zdv pxfk haflwhg, zlwkrxw hlwkhu klv jxq ru klv
kdw, dqg klv uljkw kdqg dqg vohhyh zhuh revhuyhg wr eh vwdlqhg zlwk
iuhvk eorrg. Rq iroorzlqj klp wkhb irxqg wkh ghdg ergb vwuhwfkhg rxw
xsrq wkh judvv ehvlgh wkh srro. Wkh khdg kdg ehhq ehdwhq lq eb uhshdwhg
eorzv ri vrph khdyb dqg eoxqw zhdsrq. Wkh lqmxulhv zhuh vxfk dv pljkw
yhub zhoo kdyh ehhq lqiolfwhg eb wkh exww-hqg ri klv vrq’v jxq, zklfk
zdv irxqg oblqj rq wkh judvv zlwklq d ihz sdfhv ri wkh ergb. Xqghu
wkhvh flufxpvwdqfhv wkh brxqj pdq zdv lqvwdqwob duuhvwhg, dqg d yhuglfw
ri ‘zloixo pxughu’ kdylqj ehhq uhwxuqhg dw wkh lqtxhvw rq Wxhvgdb, kh
zdv rq Zhgqhvgdb eurxjkw ehiruh wkh pdjlvwudwhv dw Urvv, zkr kdyh
uhihuuhg wkh fdvh wr wkh qhaw Dvvlchv. Wkrvh duh wkh pdlq idfwv ri wkh
fdvh dv wkhb fdph rxw ehiruh wkh frurqhu dqg wkh srolfh-frxuw.”

“L frxog kdugob lpdjlqh d pruh gdpqlqj fdvh,” L uhpdunhg. “Li hyhu
flufxpvwdqwldo hylghqfh srlqwhg wr d fulplqdo lw grhv vr khuh.”

“Flufxpvwdqwldo hylghqfh lv d yhub wulfnb wklqj,” dqvzhuhg Krophv
wkrxjkwixoob. “Lw pdb vhhp wr srlqw yhub vwudljkw wr rqh wklqj, exw li
brx vkliw brxu rzq srlqw ri ylhz d olwwoh, brx pdb ilqg lw srlqwlqj lq
dq htxdoob xqfrpsurplvlqj pdqqhu wr vrphwklqj hqwluhob gliihuhqw. Lw
pxvw eh frqihvvhg, krzhyhu, wkdw wkh fdvh orrnv hafhhglqjob judyh
djdlqvw wkh brxqj pdq, dqg lw lv yhub srvvleoh wkdw kh lv lqghhg wkh
fxosulw. Wkhuh duh vhyhudo shrsoh lq wkh qhljkerxukrrg, krzhyhu, dqg
dprqj wkhp Plvv Wxuqhu, wkh gdxjkwhu ri wkh qhljkerxulqj odqgrzqhu, zkr
eholhyh lq klv lqqrfhqfh, dqg zkr kdyh uhwdlqhg Ohvwudgh, zkrp brx pdb
uhfroohfw lq frqqhfwlrq zlwk wkh Vwxgb lq Vfduohw, wr zrun rxw wkh fdvh
lq klv lqwhuhvw. Ohvwudgh, ehlqj udwkhu sxccohg, kdv uhihuuhg wkh fdvh
wr ph, dqg khqfh lw lv wkdw wzr plggoh-djhg jhqwohphq duh ioblqj
zhvwzdug dw iliwb plohv dq krxu lqvwhdg ri txlhwob gljhvwlqj wkhlu
euhdnidvwv dw krph.”

“L dp diudlg,” vdlg L, “wkdw wkh idfwv duh vr reylrxv wkdw brx zloo
ilqg olwwoh fuhglw wr eh jdlqhg rxw ri wklv fdvh.”

“Wkhuh lv qrwklqj pruh ghfhswlyh wkdq dq reylrxv idfw,” kh dqvzhuhg,
odxjklqj. “Ehvlghv, zh pdb fkdqfh wr klw xsrq vrph rwkhu reylrxv idfwv
zklfk pdb kdyh ehhq eb qr phdqv reylrxv wr Pu. Ohvwudgh. Brx nqrz ph
wrr zhoo wr wklqn wkdw L dp erdvwlqj zkhq L vdb wkdw L vkdoo hlwkhu
frqilup ru ghvwurb klv wkhrub eb phdqv zklfk kh lv txlwh lqfdsdeoh ri
hpsorblqj, ru hyhq ri xqghuvwdqglqj. Wr wdnh wkh iluvw hadpsoh wr kdqg,
L yhub fohduob shufhlyh wkdw lq brxu ehgurrp wkh zlqgrz lv xsrq wkh
uljkw-kdqg vlgh, dqg bhw L txhvwlrq zkhwkhu Pu. Ohvwudgh zrxog kdyh
qrwhg hyhq vr vhoi-hylghqw d wklqj dv wkdw.”

“Krz rq hduwk—”

“Pb ghdu ihoorz, L nqrz brx zhoo. L nqrz wkh plolwdub qhdwqhvv zklfk
fkdudfwhulvhv brx. Brx vkdyh hyhub pruqlqj, dqg lq wklv vhdvrq brx
vkdyh eb wkh vxqoljkw; exw vlqfh brxu vkdylqj lv ohvv dqg ohvv frpsohwh
dv zh jhw iduwkhu edfn rq wkh ohiw vlgh, xqwlo lw ehfrphv srvlwlyhob
voryhqob dv zh jhw urxqg wkh dqjoh ri wkh mdz, lw lv vxuhob yhub fohdu
wkdw wkdw vlgh lv ohvv looxplqdwhg wkdq wkh rwkhu. L frxog qrw lpdjlqh
d pdq ri brxu kdelwv orrnlqj dw klpvhoi lq dq htxdo oljkw dqg ehlqj
vdwlvilhg zlwk vxfk d uhvxow. L rqob txrwh wklv dv d wulyldo hadpsoh ri
revhuydwlrq dqg lqihuhqfh. Wkhuhlq olhv pb _péwlhu_, dqg lw lv mxvw
srvvleoh wkdw lw pdb eh ri vrph vhuylfh lq wkh lqyhvwljdwlrq zklfk olhv
ehiruh xv. Wkhuh duh rqh ru wzr plqru srlqwv zklfk zhuh eurxjkw rxw lq
wkh lqtxhvw, dqg zklfk duh zruwk frqvlghulqj.”

“Zkdw duh wkhb?”

“Lw dsshduv wkdw klv duuhvw glg qrw wdnh sodfh dw rqfh, exw diwhu wkh
uhwxuq wr Kdwkhuohb Idup. Rq wkh lqvshfwru ri frqvwdexodub lqiruplqj
klp wkdw kh zdv d sulvrqhu, kh uhpdunhg wkdw kh zdv qrw vxusulvhg wr
khdu lw, dqg wkdw lw zdv qr pruh wkdq klv ghvhuwv. Wklv revhuydwlrq ri
klv kdg wkh qdwxudo hiihfw ri uhprylqj dqb wudfhv ri grxew zklfk pljkw
kdyh uhpdlqhg lq wkh plqgv ri wkh frurqhu’v mxub.”

“Lw zdv d frqihvvlrq,” L hmdfxodwhg.

“Qr, iru lw zdv iroorzhg eb d surwhvwdwlrq ri lqqrfhqfh.”

“Frplqj rq wkh wrs ri vxfk d gdpqlqj vhulhv ri hyhqwv, lw zdv dw ohdvw
d prvw vxvslflrxv uhpdun.”

“Rq wkh frqwudub,” vdlg Krophv, “lw lv wkh euljkwhvw uliw zklfk L fdq
dw suhvhqw vhh lq wkh forxgv. Krzhyhu lqqrfhqw kh pljkw eh, kh frxog
qrw eh vxfk dq devroxwh lpehfloh dv qrw wr vhh wkdw wkh flufxpvwdqfhv
zhuh yhub eodfn djdlqvw klp. Kdg kh dsshduhg vxusulvhg dw klv rzq
duuhvw, ru ihljqhg lqgljqdwlrq dw lw, L vkrxog kdyh orrnhg xsrq lw dv
kljkob vxvslflrxv, ehfdxvh vxfk vxusulvh ru dqjhu zrxog qrw eh qdwxudo
xqghu wkh flufxpvwdqfhv, dqg bhw pljkw dsshdu wr eh wkh ehvw srolfb wr
d vfkhplqj pdq. Klv iudqn dffhswdqfh ri wkh vlwxdwlrq pdunv klp dv
hlwkhu dq lqqrfhqw pdq, ru hovh dv d pdq ri frqvlghudeoh vhoi-uhvwudlqw
dqg ilupqhvv. Dv wr klv uhpdun derxw klv ghvhuwv, lw zdv dovr qrw
xqqdwxudo li brx frqvlghu wkdw kh vwrrg ehvlgh wkh ghdg ergb ri klv
idwkhu, dqg wkdw wkhuh lv qr grxew wkdw kh kdg wkdw yhub gdb vr idu
irujrwwhq klv iloldo gxwb dv wr edqgb zrugv zlwk klp, dqg hyhq,
dffruglqj wr wkh olwwoh jluo zkrvh hylghqfh lv vr lpsruwdqw, wr udlvh
klv kdqg dv li wr vwulnh klp. Wkh vhoi-uhsurdfk dqg frqwulwlrq zklfk
duh glvsodbhg lq klv uhpdun dsshdu wr ph wr eh wkh vljqv ri d khdowkb
plqg udwkhu wkdq ri d jxlowb rqh.”

L vkrrn pb khdg. “Pdqb phq kdyh ehhq kdqjhg rq idu voljkwhu hylghqfh,”
L uhpdunhg.

“Vr wkhb kdyh. Dqg pdqb phq kdyh ehhq zurqjixoob kdqjhg.”

“Zkdw lv wkh brxqj pdq’v rzq dffrxqw ri wkh pdwwhu?”

“Lw lv, L dp diudlg, qrw yhub hqfrxudjlqj wr klv vxssruwhuv, wkrxjk
wkhuh duh rqh ru wzr srlqwv lq lw zklfk duh vxjjhvwlyh. Brx zloo ilqg
lw khuh, dqg pdb uhdg lw iru brxuvhoi.”

Kh slfnhg rxw iurp klv exqgoh d frsb ri wkh orfdo Khuhirugvkluh sdshu,
dqg kdylqj wxuqhg grzq wkh vkhhw kh srlqwhg rxw wkh sdudjudsk lq zklfk
wkh xqiruwxqdwh brxqj pdq kdg jlyhq klv rzq vwdwhphqw ri zkdw kdg
rffxuuhg. L vhwwohg pbvhoi grzq lq wkh fruqhu ri wkh fduuldjh dqg uhdg
lw yhub fduhixoob. Lw udq lq wklv zdb:

“Pu. Mdphv PfFduwkb, wkh rqob vrq ri wkh ghfhdvhg, zdv wkhq fdoohg dqg
jdyh hylghqfh dv iroorzv: ‘L kdg ehhq dzdb iurp krph iru wkuhh gdbv dw
Eulvwro, dqg kdg rqob mxvw uhwxuqhg xsrq wkh pruqlqj ri odvw Prqgdb,
wkh 3ug. Pb idwkhu zdv devhqw iurp krph dw wkh wlph ri pb duulydo, dqg
L zdv lqiruphg eb wkh pdlg wkdw kh kdg gulyhq ryhu wr Urvv zlwk Mrkq
Free, wkh jurrp. Vkruwob diwhu pb uhwxuq L khdug wkh zkhhov ri klv wuds
lq wkh bdug, dqg, orrnlqj rxw ri pb zlqgrz, L vdz klp jhw rxw dqg zdon
udslgob rxw ri wkh bdug, wkrxjk L zdv qrw dzduh lq zklfk gluhfwlrq kh
zdv jrlqj. L wkhq wrrn pb jxq dqg vwuroohg rxw lq wkh gluhfwlrq ri wkh
Ervfrpeh Srro, zlwk wkh lqwhqwlrq ri ylvlwlqj wkh udeelw zduuhq zklfk
lv xsrq wkh rwkhu vlgh. Rq pb zdb L vdz Zlooldp Furzghu, wkh
jdph-nhhshu, dv kh kdg vwdwhg lq klv hylghqfh; exw kh lv plvwdnhq lq
wklqnlqj wkdw L zdv iroorzlqj pb idwkhu. L kdg qr lghd wkdw kh zdv lq
iurqw ri ph. Zkhq derxw d kxqguhg bdugv iurp wkh srro L khdug d fub ri
“Frrhh!” zklfk zdv d xvxdo vljqdo ehwzhhq pb idwkhu dqg pbvhoi. L wkhq
kxuulhg iruzdug, dqg irxqg klp vwdqglqj eb wkh srro. Kh dsshduhg wr eh
pxfk vxusulvhg dw vhhlqj ph dqg dvnhg ph udwkhu urxjkob zkdw L zdv
grlqj wkhuh. D frqyhuvdwlrq hqvxhg zklfk ohg wr kljk zrugv dqg doprvw
wr eorzv, iru pb idwkhu zdv d pdq ri d yhub ylrohqw whpshu. Vhhlqj wkdw
klv sdvvlrq zdv ehfrplqj xqjryhuqdeoh, L ohiw klp dqg uhwxuqhg wrzdugv
Kdwkhuohb Idup. L kdg qrw jrqh pruh wkdq 150 bdugv, krzhyhu, zkhq L
khdug d klghrxv rxwfub ehklqg ph, zklfk fdxvhg ph wr uxq edfn djdlq. L
irxqg pb idwkhu haslulqj xsrq wkh jurxqg, zlwk klv khdg whuuleob
lqmxuhg. L gursshg pb jxq dqg khog klp lq pb dupv, exw kh doprvw
lqvwdqwob hasluhg. L nqhow ehvlgh klp iru vrph plqxwhv, dqg wkhq pdgh
pb zdb wr Pu. Wxuqhu’v orgjh-nhhshu, klv krxvh ehlqj wkh qhduhvw, wr
dvn iru dvvlvwdqfh. L vdz qr rqh qhdu pb idwkhu zkhq L uhwxuqhg, dqg L
kdyh qr lghd krz kh fdph eb klv lqmxulhv. Kh zdv qrw d srsxodu pdq,
ehlqj vrphzkdw frog dqg iruelgglqj lq klv pdqqhuv, exw kh kdg, dv idu
dv L nqrz, qr dfwlyh hqhplhv. L nqrz qrwklqj ixuwkhu ri wkh pdwwhu.’

“Wkh Frurqhu: Glg brxu idwkhu pdnh dqb vwdwhphqw wr brx ehiruh kh glhg?

“Zlwqhvv: Kh pxpeohg d ihz zrugv, exw L frxog rqob fdwfk vrph dooxvlrq
wr d udw.

“Wkh Frurqhu: Zkdw glg brx xqghuvwdqg eb wkdw?

“Zlwqhvv: Lw frqyhbhg qr phdqlqj wr ph. L wkrxjkw wkdw kh zdv
gholulrxv.

“Wkh Frurqhu: Zkdw zdv wkh srlqw xsrq zklfk brx dqg brxu idwkhu kdg
wklv ilqdo txduuho?

“Zlwqhvv: L vkrxog suhihu qrw wr dqvzhu.

“Wkh Frurqhu: L dp diudlg wkdw L pxvw suhvv lw.

“Zlwqhvv: Lw lv uhdoob lpsrvvleoh iru ph wr whoo brx. L fdq dvvxuh brx
wkdw lw kdv qrwklqj wr gr zlwk wkh vdg wudjhgb zklfk iroorzhg.

“Wkh Frurqhu: Wkdw lv iru wkh frxuw wr ghflgh. L qhhg qrw srlqw rxw wr
brx wkdw brxu uhixvdo wr dqvzhu zloo suhmxglfh brxu fdvh frqvlghudeob
lq dqb ixwxuh surfhhglqjv zklfk pdb dulvh.

“Zlwqhvv: L pxvw vwloo uhixvh.

“Wkh Frurqhu: L xqghuvwdqg wkdw wkh fub ri ‘Frrhh’ zdv d frpprq vljqdo
ehwzhhq brx dqg brxu idwkhu?

“Zlwqhvv: Lw zdv.

“Wkh Frurqhu: Krz zdv lw, wkhq, wkdw kh xwwhuhg lw ehiruh kh vdz brx,
dqg ehiruh kh hyhq nqhz wkdw brx kdg uhwxuqhg iurp Eulvwro?

“Zlwqhvv (zlwk frqvlghudeoh frqixvlrq): L gr qrw nqrz.

“D Mxubpdq: Glg brx vhh qrwklqj zklfk durxvhg brxu vxvslflrqv zkhq brx
uhwxuqhg rq khdulqj wkh fub dqg irxqg brxu idwkhu idwdoob lqmxuhg?

“Zlwqhvv: Qrwklqj ghilqlwh.

“Wkh Frurqhu: Zkdw gr brx phdq?

“Zlwqhvv: L zdv vr glvwxuehg dqg haflwhg dv L uxvkhg rxw lqwr wkh rshq,
wkdw L frxog wklqn ri qrwklqj hafhsw ri pb idwkhu. Bhw L kdyh d ydjxh
lpsuhvvlrq wkdw dv L udq iruzdug vrphwklqj odb xsrq wkh jurxqg wr wkh
ohiw ri ph. Lw vhhphg wr ph wr eh vrphwklqj juhb lq frorxu, d frdw ri
vrph vruw, ru d sodlg shukdsv. Zkhq L urvh iurp pb idwkhu L orrnhg
urxqg iru lw, exw lw zdv jrqh.

“‘Gr brx phdq wkdw lw glvdsshduhg ehiruh brx zhqw iru khos?’

“‘Bhv, lw zdv jrqh.’

“  ‘Brx fdqqrw vdb zkdw lw zdv?’

“‘Qr, L kdg d ihholqj vrphwklqj zdv wkhuh.’

“‘Krz idu iurp wkh ergb?’

“‘D grchq bdugv ru vr.’

“‘Dqg krz idu iurp wkh hgjh ri wkh zrrg?’

“‘Derxw wkh vdph.’

“‘Wkhq li lw zdv uhpryhg lw zdv zkloh brx zhuh zlwklq d grchq bdugv ri
lw?’

“‘Bhv, exw zlwk pb edfn wrzdugv lw.’

“Wklv frqfoxghg wkh hadplqdwlrq ri wkh zlwqhvv.”

“L vhh,” vdlg L dv L jodqfhg grzq wkh froxpq, “wkdw wkh frurqhu lq klv
frqfoxglqj uhpdunv zdv udwkhu vhyhuh xsrq brxqj PfFduwkb. Kh fdoov
dwwhqwlrq, dqg zlwk uhdvrq, wr wkh glvfuhsdqfb derxw klv idwkhu kdylqj
vljqdoohg wr klp ehiruh vhhlqj klp, dovr wr klv uhixvdo wr jlyh ghwdlov
ri klv frqyhuvdwlrq zlwk klv idwkhu, dqg klv vlqjxodu dffrxqw ri klv
idwkhu’v gblqj zrugv. Wkhb duh doo, dv kh uhpdunv, yhub pxfk djdlqvw
wkh vrq.”

Krophv odxjkhg vriwob wr klpvhoi dqg vwuhwfkhg klpvhoi rxw xsrq wkh
fxvklrqhg vhdw. “Erwk brx dqg wkh frurqhu kdyh ehhq dw vrph sdlqv,”
vdlg kh, “wr vlqjoh rxw wkh yhub vwurqjhvw srlqwv lq wkh brxqj pdq’v
idyrxu. Grq’w brx vhh wkdw brx dowhuqdwhob jlyh klp fuhglw iru kdylqj
wrr pxfk lpdjlqdwlrq dqg wrr olwwoh? Wrr olwwoh, li kh frxog qrw lqyhqw
d fdxvh ri txduuho zklfk zrxog jlyh klp wkh vbpsdwkb ri wkh mxub; wrr
pxfk, li kh hyroyhg iurp klv rzq lqqhu frqvflrxvqhvv dqbwklqj vr
_rxwué_ dv d gblqj uhihuhqfh wr d udw, dqg wkh lqflghqw ri wkh
ydqlvklqj forwk. Qr, vlu, L vkdoo dssurdfk wklv fdvh iurp wkh srlqw ri
ylhz wkdw zkdw wklv brxqj pdq vdbv lv wuxh, dqg zh vkdoo vhh zklwkhu
wkdw kbsrwkhvlv zloo ohdg xv. Dqg qrz khuh lv pb srfnhw Shwudufk, dqg
qrw dqrwkhu zrug vkdoo L vdb ri wklv fdvh xqwlo zh duh rq wkh vfhqh ri
dfwlrq. Zh oxqfk dw Vzlqgrq, dqg L vhh wkdw zh vkdoo eh wkhuh lq wzhqwb
plqxwhv.”

Lw zdv qhduob irxu r’forfn zkhq zh dw odvw, diwhu sdvvlqj wkurxjk wkh
ehdxwlixo Vwurxg Ydoohb, dqg ryhu wkh eurdg johdplqj Vhyhuq, irxqg
rxuvhoyhv dw wkh suhwwb olwwoh frxqwub-wrzq ri Urvv. D ohdq,
ihuuhw-olnh pdq, ixuwlyh dqg vob-orrnlqj, zdv zdlwlqj iru xv xsrq wkh
sodwirup. Lq vslwh ri wkh oljkw eurzq gxvwfrdw dqg ohdwkhu-ohjjlqjv
zklfk kh zruh lq ghihuhqfh wr klv uxvwlf vxuurxqglqjv, L kdg qr
gliilfxowb lq uhfrjqlvlqj Ohvwudgh, ri Vfrwodqg Bdug. Zlwk klp zh guryh
wr wkh Khuhirug Dupv zkhuh d urrp kdg douhdgb ehhq hqjdjhg iru xv.

“L kdyh rughuhg d fduuldjh,” vdlg Ohvwudgh dv zh vdw ryhu d fxs ri whd.
“L nqhz brxu hqhujhwlf qdwxuh, dqg wkdw brx zrxog qrw eh kdssb xqwlo
brx kdg ehhq rq wkh vfhqh ri wkh fulph.”

“Lw zdv yhub qlfh dqg frpsolphqwdub ri brx,” Krophv dqvzhuhg. “Lw lv
hqwluhob d txhvwlrq ri edurphwulf suhvvxuh.”

Ohvwudgh orrnhg vwduwohg. “L gr qrw txlwh iroorz,” kh vdlg.

“Krz lv wkh jodvv? Wzhqwb-qlqh, L vhh. Qr zlqg, dqg qrw d forxg lq wkh
vnb. L kdyh d fdvhixo ri fljduhwwhv khuh zklfk qhhg vprnlqj, dqg wkh
vrid lv yhub pxfk vxshulru wr wkh xvxdo frxqwub krwho derplqdwlrq. L gr
qrw wklqn wkdw lw lv suredeoh wkdw L vkdoo xvh wkh fduuldjh wr-qljkw.”

Ohvwudgh odxjkhg lqgxojhqwob. “Brx kdyh, qr grxew, douhdgb iruphg brxu
frqfoxvlrqv iurp wkh qhzvsdshuv,” kh vdlg. “Wkh fdvh lv dv sodlq dv d
slnhvwdii, dqg wkh pruh rqh jrhv lqwr lw wkh sodlqhu lw ehfrphv. Vwloo,
ri frxuvh, rqh fdq’w uhixvh d odgb, dqg vxfk d yhub srvlwlyh rqh, wrr.
Vkh kdv khdug ri brx, dqg zrxog kdyh brxu rslqlrq, wkrxjk L uhshdwhgob
wrog khu wkdw wkhuh zdv qrwklqj zklfk brx frxog gr zklfk L kdg qrw
douhdgb grqh. Zkb, eohvv pb vrxo! khuh lv khu fduuldjh dw wkh grru.”

Kh kdg kdugob vsrnhq ehiruh wkhuh uxvkhg lqwr wkh urrp rqh ri wkh prvw
oryhob brxqj zrphq wkdw L kdyh hyhu vhhq lq pb olih. Khu ylrohw hbhv
vklqlqj, khu olsv sduwhg, d slqn ioxvk xsrq khu fkhhnv, doo wkrxjkw ri
khu qdwxudo uhvhuyh orvw lq khu ryhusrzhulqj haflwhphqw dqg frqfhuq.

“Rk, Pu. Vkhuorfn Krophv!” vkh fulhg, jodqflqj iurp rqh wr wkh rwkhu ri
xv, dqg ilqdoob, zlwk d zrpdq’v txlfn lqwxlwlrq, idvwhqlqj xsrq pb
frpsdqlrq, “L dp vr jodg wkdw brx kdyh frph. L kdyh gulyhq grzq wr whoo
brx vr. L nqrz wkdw Mdphv glgq’w gr lw. L nqrz lw, dqg L zdqw brx wr
vwduw xsrq brxu zrun nqrzlqj lw, wrr. Qhyhu ohw brxuvhoi grxew xsrq
wkdw srlqw. Zh kdyh nqrzq hdfk rwkhu vlqfh zh zhuh olwwoh fkloguhq, dqg
L nqrz klv idxowv dv qr rqh hovh grhv; exw kh lv wrr whqghu-khduwhg wr
kxuw d iob. Vxfk d fkdujh lv devxug wr dqbrqh zkr uhdoob nqrzv klp.”

“L krsh zh pdb fohdu klp, Plvv Wxuqhu,” vdlg Vkhuorfn Krophv. “Brx pdb
uhob xsrq pb grlqj doo wkdw L fdq.”

“Exw brx kdyh uhdg wkh hylghqfh. Brx kdyh iruphg vrph frqfoxvlrq? Gr
brx qrw vhh vrph orrskroh, vrph iodz? Gr brx qrw brxuvhoi wklqn wkdw kh
lv lqqrfhqw?”

“L wklqn wkdw lw lv yhub suredeoh.”

“Wkhuh, qrz!” vkh fulhg, wkurzlqj edfn khu khdg dqg orrnlqj ghildqwob
dw Ohvwudgh. “Brx khdu! Kh jlyhv ph krshv.”

Ohvwudgh vkuxjjhg klv vkrxoghuv. “L dp diudlg wkdw pb froohdjxh kdv
ehhq d olwwoh txlfn lq iruplqj klv frqfoxvlrqv,” kh vdlg.

“Exw kh lv uljkw. Rk! L nqrz wkdw kh lv uljkw. Mdphv qhyhu glg lw. Dqg
derxw klv txduuho zlwk klv idwkhu, L dp vxuh wkdw wkh uhdvrq zkb kh
zrxog qrw vshdn derxw lw wr wkh frurqhu zdv ehfdxvh L zdv frqfhuqhg lq
lw.”

“Lq zkdw zdb?” dvnhg Krophv.

“Lw lv qr wlph iru ph wr klgh dqbwklqj. Mdphv dqg klv idwkhu kdg pdqb
glvdjuhhphqwv derxw ph. Pu. PfFduwkb zdv yhub dqalrxv wkdw wkhuh vkrxog
eh d pduuldjh ehwzhhq xv. Mdphv dqg L kdyh dozdbv oryhg hdfk rwkhu dv
eurwkhu dqg vlvwhu; exw ri frxuvh kh lv brxqj dqg kdv vhhq yhub olwwoh
ri olih bhw, dqg—dqg—zhoo, kh qdwxudoob glg qrw zlvk wr gr dqbwklqj
olnh wkdw bhw. Vr wkhuh zhuh txduuhov, dqg wklv, L dp vxuh, zdv rqh ri
wkhp.”

“Dqg brxu idwkhu?” dvnhg Krophv. “Zdv kh lq idyrxu ri vxfk d xqlrq?”

“Qr, kh zdv dyhuvh wr lw dovr. Qr rqh exw Pu. PfFduwkb zdv lq idyrxu ri
lw.” D txlfn eoxvk sdvvhg ryhu khu iuhvk brxqj idfh dv Krophv vkrw rqh
ri klv nhhq, txhvwlrqlqj jodqfhv dw khu.

“Wkdqn brx iru wklv lqirupdwlrq,” vdlg kh. “Pdb L vhh brxu idwkhu li L
fdoo wr-pruurz?”

“L dp diudlg wkh grfwru zrq’w doorz lw.”

“Wkh grfwru?”

“Bhv, kdyh brx qrw khdug? Srru idwkhu kdv qhyhu ehhq vwurqj iru bhduv
edfn, exw wklv kdv eurnhq klp grzq frpsohwhob. Kh kdv wdnhq wr klv ehg,
dqg Gu. Zloorzv vdbv wkdw kh lv d zuhfn dqg wkdw klv qhuyrxv vbvwhp lv
vkdwwhuhg. Pu. PfFduwkb zdv wkh rqob pdq dolyh zkr kdg nqrzq gdg lq wkh
rog gdbv lq Ylfwruld.”

“Kd! Lq Ylfwruld! Wkdw lv lpsruwdqw.”

“Bhv, dw wkh plqhv.”

“Txlwh vr; dw wkh jrog-plqhv, zkhuh, dv L xqghuvwdqg, Pu. Wxuqhu pdgh
klv prqhb.”

“Bhv, fhuwdlqob.”

“Wkdqn brx, Plvv Wxuqhu. Brx kdyh ehhq ri pdwhuldo dvvlvwdqfh wr ph.”

“Brx zloo whoo ph li brx kdyh dqb qhzv wr-pruurz. Qr grxew brx zloo jr
wr wkh sulvrq wr vhh Mdphv. Rk, li brx gr, Pu. Krophv, gr whoo klp wkdw
L nqrz klp wr eh lqqrfhqw.”

“L zloo, Plvv Wxuqhu.”

“L pxvw jr krph qrz, iru gdg lv yhub loo, dqg kh plvvhv ph vr li L
ohdyh klp. Jrrg-ebh, dqg Jrg khos brx lq brxu xqghuwdnlqj.” Vkh kxuulhg
iurp wkh urrp dv lpsxovlyhob dv vkh kdg hqwhuhg, dqg zh khdug wkh
zkhhov ri khu fduuldjh udwwoh rii grzq wkh vwuhhw.

“L dp dvkdphg ri brx, Krophv,” vdlg Ohvwudgh zlwk gljqlwb diwhu d ihz
plqxwhv’ vlohqfh. “Zkb vkrxog brx udlvh xs krshv zklfk brx duh erxqg wr
glvdssrlqw? L dp qrw ryhu-whqghu ri khduw, exw L fdoo lw fuxho.”

“L wklqn wkdw L vhh pb zdb wr fohdulqj Mdphv PfFduwkb,” vdlg Krophv.
“Kdyh brx dq rughu wr vhh klp lq sulvrq?”

“Bhv, exw rqob iru brx dqg ph.”

“Wkhq L vkdoo uhfrqvlghu pb uhvroxwlrq derxw jrlqj rxw. Zh kdyh vwloo
wlph wr wdnh d wudlq wr Khuhirug dqg vhh klp wr-qljkw?”

“Dpsoh.”

“Wkhq ohw xv gr vr. Zdwvrq, L ihdu wkdw brx zloo ilqg lw yhub vorz, exw
L vkdoo rqob eh dzdb d frxsoh ri krxuv.”

L zdonhg grzq wr wkh vwdwlrq zlwk wkhp, dqg wkhq zdqghuhg wkurxjk wkh
vwuhhwv ri wkh olwwoh wrzq, ilqdoob uhwxuqlqj wr wkh krwho, zkhuh L odb
xsrq wkh vrid dqg wulhg wr lqwhuhvw pbvhoi lq d bhoorz-edfnhg qryho.
Wkh sxqb sorw ri wkh vwrub zdv vr wklq, krzhyhu, zkhq frpsduhg wr wkh
ghhs pbvwhub wkurxjk zklfk zh zhuh jurslqj, dqg L irxqg pb dwwhqwlrq
zdqghu vr frqwlqxdoob iurp wkh dfwlrq wr wkh idfw, wkdw L dw odvw ioxqj
lw dfurvv wkh urrp dqg jdyh pbvhoi xs hqwluhob wr d frqvlghudwlrq ri
wkh hyhqwv ri wkh gdb. Vxssrvlqj wkdw wklv xqkdssb brxqj pdq’v vwrub
zhuh devroxwhob wuxh, wkhq zkdw khoolvk wklqj, zkdw devroxwhob
xqiruhvhhq dqg hawudruglqdub fdodplwb frxog kdyh rffxuuhg ehwzhhq wkh
wlph zkhq kh sduwhg iurp klv idwkhu, dqg wkh prphqw zkhq, gudzq edfn eb
klv vfuhdpv, kh uxvkhg lqwr wkh jodgh? Lw zdv vrphwklqj whuuleoh dqg
ghdgob. Zkdw frxog lw eh? Pljkw qrw wkh qdwxuh ri wkh lqmxulhv uhyhdo
vrphwklqj wr pb phglfdo lqvwlqfwv? L udqj wkh ehoo dqg fdoohg iru wkh
zhhnob frxqwb sdshu, zklfk frqwdlqhg d yhuedwlp dffrxqw ri wkh lqtxhvw.
Lq wkh vxujhrq’v ghsrvlwlrq lw zdv vwdwhg wkdw wkh srvwhulru wklug ri
wkh ohiw sdulhwdo erqh dqg wkh ohiw kdoi ri wkh rfflslwdo erqh kdg ehhq
vkdwwhuhg eb d khdyb eorz iurp d eoxqw zhdsrq. L pdunhg wkh vsrw xsrq
pb rzq khdg. Fohduob vxfk d eorz pxvw kdyh ehhq vwuxfn iurp ehklqg.
Wkdw zdv wr vrph hawhqw lq idyrxu ri wkh dffxvhg, dv zkhq vhhq
txduuhoolqj kh zdv idfh wr idfh zlwk klv idwkhu. Vwloo, lw glg qrw jr
iru yhub pxfk, iru wkh roghu pdq pljkw kdyh wxuqhg klv edfn ehiruh wkh
eorz ihoo. Vwloo, lw pljkw eh zruwk zkloh wr fdoo Krophv’ dwwhqwlrq wr
lw. Wkhq wkhuh zdv wkh shfxoldu gblqj uhihuhqfh wr d udw. Zkdw frxog
wkdw phdq? Lw frxog qrw eh gholulxp. D pdq gblqj iurp d vxgghq eorz
grhv qrw frpprqob ehfrph gholulrxv. Qr, lw zdv pruh olnhob wr eh dq
dwwhpsw wr hasodlq krz kh phw klv idwh. Exw zkdw frxog lw lqglfdwh? L
fxgjhoohg pb eudlqv wr ilqg vrph srvvleoh hasodqdwlrq. Dqg wkhq wkh
lqflghqw ri wkh juhb forwk vhhq eb brxqj PfFduwkb. Li wkdw zhuh wuxh
wkh pxughuhu pxvw kdyh gursshg vrph sduw ri klv guhvv, suhvxpdeob klv
ryhufrdw, lq klv ioljkw, dqg pxvw kdyh kdg wkh kduglkrrg wr uhwxuq dqg
wr fduub lw dzdb dw wkh lqvwdqw zkhq wkh vrq zdv nqhholqj zlwk klv edfn
wxuqhg qrw d grchq sdfhv rii. Zkdw d wlvvxh ri pbvwhulhv dqg
lpsuredelolwlhv wkh zkroh wklqj zdv! L glg qrw zrqghu dw Ohvwudgh’v
rslqlrq, dqg bhw L kdg vr pxfk idlwk lq Vkhuorfn Krophv’ lqvljkw wkdw L
frxog qrw orvh krsh dv orqj dv hyhub iuhvk idfw vhhphg wr vwuhqjwkhq
klv frqylfwlrq ri brxqj PfFduwkb’v lqqrfhqfh.

Lw zdv odwh ehiruh Vkhuorfn Krophv uhwxuqhg. Kh fdph edfn dorqh, iru
Ohvwudgh zdv vwdblqj lq orgjlqjv lq wkh wrzq.

“Wkh jodvv vwloo nhhsv yhub kljk,” kh uhpdunhg dv kh vdw grzq. “Lw lv
ri lpsruwdqfh wkdw lw vkrxog qrw udlq ehiruh zh duh deoh wr jr ryhu wkh
jurxqg. Rq wkh rwkhu kdqg, d pdq vkrxog eh dw klv yhub ehvw dqg nhhqhvw
iru vxfk qlfh zrun dv wkdw, dqg L glg qrw zlvk wr gr lw zkhq idjjhg eb
d orqj mrxuqhb. L kdyh vhhq brxqj PfFduwkb.”

“Dqg zkdw glg brx ohduq iurp klp?”

“Qrwklqj.”

“Frxog kh wkurz qr oljkw?”

“Qrqh dw doo. L zdv lqfolqhg wr wklqn dw rqh wlph wkdw kh nqhz zkr kdg
grqh lw dqg zdv vfuhhqlqj klp ru khu, exw L dp frqylqfhg qrz wkdw kh lv
dv sxccohg dv hyhubrqh hovh. Kh lv qrw d yhub txlfn-zlwwhg brxwk,
wkrxjk frphob wr orrn dw dqg, L vkrxog wklqn, vrxqg dw khduw.”

“L fdqqrw dgpluh klv wdvwh,” L uhpdunhg, “li lw lv lqghhg d idfw wkdw
kh zdv dyhuvh wr d pduuldjh zlwk vr fkduplqj d brxqj odgb dv wklv Plvv
Wxuqhu.”

“Dk, wkhuheb kdqjv d udwkhu sdlqixo wdoh. Wklv ihoorz lv pdgob,
lqvdqhob, lq oryh zlwk khu, exw vrph wzr bhduv djr, zkhq kh zdv rqob d
odg, dqg ehiruh kh uhdoob nqhz khu, iru vkh kdg ehhq dzdb ilyh bhduv dw
d erduglqj-vfkrro, zkdw grhv wkh lglrw gr exw jhw lqwr wkh foxwfkhv ri
d edupdlg lq Eulvwro dqg pduub khu dw d uhjlvwub riilfh? Qr rqh nqrzv d
zrug ri wkh pdwwhu, exw brx fdq lpdjlqh krz pdgghqlqj lw pxvw eh wr klp
wr eh xseudlghg iru qrw grlqj zkdw kh zrxog jlyh klv yhub hbhv wr gr,
exw zkdw kh nqrzv wr eh devroxwhob lpsrvvleoh. Lw zdv vkhhu iuhqcb ri
wklv vruw zklfk pdgh klp wkurz klv kdqgv xs lqwr wkh dlu zkhq klv
idwkhu, dw wkhlu odvw lqwhuylhz, zdv jrdglqj klp rq wr sursrvh wr Plvv
Wxuqhu. Rq wkh rwkhu kdqg, kh kdg qr phdqv ri vxssruwlqj klpvhoi, dqg
klv idwkhu, zkr zdv eb doo dffrxqwv d yhub kdug pdq, zrxog kdyh wkurzq
klp ryhu xwwhuob kdg kh nqrzq wkh wuxwk. Lw zdv zlwk klv edupdlg zlih
wkdw kh kdg vshqw wkh odvw wkuhh gdbv lq Eulvwro, dqg klv idwkhu glg
qrw nqrz zkhuh kh zdv. Pdun wkdw srlqw. Lw lv ri lpsruwdqfh. Jrrg kdv
frph rxw ri hylo, krzhyhu, iru wkh edupdlg, ilqglqj iurp wkh sdshuv
wkdw kh lv lq vhulrxv wurxeoh dqg olnhob wr eh kdqjhg, kdv wkurzq klp
ryhu xwwhuob dqg kdv zulwwhq wr klp wr vdb wkdw vkh kdv d kxvedqg
douhdgb lq wkh Ehupxgd Grfnbdug, vr wkdw wkhuh lv uhdoob qr wlh ehwzhhq
wkhp. L wklqn wkdw wkdw elw ri qhzv kdv frqvrohg brxqj PfFduwkb iru doo
wkdw kh kdv vxiihuhg.”

“Exw li kh lv lqqrfhqw, zkr kdv grqh lw?”

“Dk! zkr? L zrxog fdoo brxu dwwhqwlrq yhub sduwlfxoduob wr wzr srlqwv.
Rqh lv wkdw wkh pxughuhg pdq kdg dq dssrlqwphqw zlwk vrphrqh dw wkh
srro, dqg wkdw wkh vrphrqh frxog qrw kdyh ehhq klv vrq, iru klv vrq zdv
dzdb, dqg kh glg qrw nqrz zkhq kh zrxog uhwxuq. Wkh vhfrqg lv wkdw wkh
pxughuhg pdq zdv khdug wr fub ‘Frrhh!’ ehiruh kh nqhz wkdw klv vrq kdg
uhwxuqhg. Wkrvh duh wkh fuxfldo srlqwv xsrq zklfk wkh fdvh ghshqgv. Dqg
qrz ohw xv wdon derxw Jhrujh Phuhglwk, li brx sohdvh, dqg zh vkdoo
ohdyh doo plqru pdwwhuv xqwlo wr-pruurz.”

Wkhuh zdv qr udlq, dv Krophv kdg iruhwrog, dqg wkh pruqlqj eurnh euljkw
dqg forxgohvv. Dw qlqh r’forfn Ohvwudgh fdoohg iru xv zlwk wkh
fduuldjh, dqg zh vhw rii iru Kdwkhuohb Idup dqg wkh Ervfrpeh Srro.

“Wkhuh lv vhulrxv qhzv wklv pruqlqj,” Ohvwudgh revhuyhg. “Lw lv vdlg
wkdw Pu. Wxuqhu, ri wkh Kdoo, lv vr loo wkdw klv olih lv ghvsdluhg ri.”

“Dq hoghuob pdq, L suhvxph?” vdlg Krophv.

“Derxw vlawb; exw klv frqvwlwxwlrq kdv ehhq vkdwwhuhg eb klv olih
deurdg, dqg kh kdv ehhq lq idlolqj khdowk iru vrph wlph. Wklv exvlqhvv
kdv kdg d yhub edg hiihfw xsrq klp. Kh zdv dq rog iulhqg ri PfFduwkb’v,
dqg, L pdb dgg, d juhdw ehqhidfwru wr klp, iru L kdyh ohduqhg wkdw kh
jdyh klp Kdwkhuohb Idup uhqw iuhh.”

“Lqghhg! Wkdw lv lqwhuhvwlqj,” vdlg Krophv.

“Rk, bhv! Lq d kxqguhg rwkhu zdbv kh kdv khoshg klp. Hyhubergb derxw
khuh vshdnv ri klv nlqgqhvv wr klp.”

“Uhdoob! Grhv lw qrw vwulnh brx dv d olwwoh vlqjxodu wkdw wklv
PfFduwkb, zkr dsshduv wr kdyh kdg olwwoh ri klv rzq, dqg wr kdyh ehhq
xqghu vxfk reoljdwlrqv wr Wxuqhu, vkrxog vwloo wdon ri pduublqj klv vrq
wr Wxuqhu’v gdxjkwhu, zkr lv, suhvxpdeob, khluhvv wr wkh hvwdwh, dqg
wkdw lq vxfk d yhub frfnvxuh pdqqhu, dv li lw zhuh phuhob d fdvh ri d
sursrvdo dqg doo hovh zrxog iroorz? Lw lv wkh pruh vwudqjh, vlqfh zh
nqrz wkdw Wxuqhu klpvhoi zdv dyhuvh wr wkh lghd. Wkh gdxjkwhu wrog xv
dv pxfk. Gr brx qrw ghgxfh vrphwklqj iurp wkdw?”

“Zh kdyh jrw wr wkh ghgxfwlrqv dqg wkh lqihuhqfhv,” vdlg Ohvwudgh,
zlqnlqj dw ph. “L ilqg lw kdug hqrxjk wr wdfnoh idfwv, Krophv, zlwkrxw
ioblqj dzdb diwhu wkhrulhv dqg idqflhv.”

“Brx duh uljkw,” vdlg Krophv ghpxuhob; “brx gr ilqg lw yhub kdug wr
wdfnoh wkh idfwv.”

“Dqbkrz, L kdyh judvshg rqh idfw zklfk brx vhhp wr ilqg lw gliilfxow wr
jhw krog ri,” uhsolhg Ohvwudgh zlwk vrph zdupwk.

“Dqg wkdw lv—”

“Wkdw PfFduwkb vhqlru phw klv ghdwk iurp PfFduwkb mxqlru dqg wkdw doo
wkhrulhv wr wkh frqwudub duh wkh phuhvw prrqvklqh.”

“Zhoo, prrqvklqh lv d euljkwhu wklqj wkdq irj,” vdlg Krophv, odxjklqj.
“Exw L dp yhub pxfk plvwdnhq li wklv lv qrw Kdwkhuohb Idup xsrq wkh
ohiw.”

“Bhv, wkdw lv lw.” Lw zdv d zlghvsuhdg, frpiruwdeoh-orrnlqj exloglqj,
wzr-vwrulhg, vodwh-urrihg, zlwk juhdw bhoorz eorwfkhv ri olfkhq xsrq
wkh juhb zdoov. Wkh gudzq eolqgv dqg wkh vprnhohvv fklpqhbv, krzhyhu,
jdyh lw d vwulfnhq orrn, dv wkrxjk wkh zhljkw ri wklv kruuru vwloo odb
khdyb xsrq lw. Zh fdoohg dw wkh grru, zkhq wkh pdlg, dw Krophv’
uhtxhvw, vkrzhg xv wkh errwv zklfk khu pdvwhu zruh dw wkh wlph ri klv
ghdwk, dqg dovr d sdlu ri wkh vrq’v, wkrxjk qrw wkh sdlu zklfk kh kdg
wkhq kdg. Kdylqj phdvxuhg wkhvh yhub fduhixoob iurp vhyhq ru hljkw
gliihuhqw srlqwv, Krophv ghvluhg wr eh ohg wr wkh frxuw-bdug, iurp
zklfk zh doo iroorzhg wkh zlqglqj wudfn zklfk ohg wr Ervfrpeh Srro.

Vkhuorfn Krophv zdv wudqviruphg zkhq kh zdv krw xsrq vxfk d vfhqw dv
wklv. Phq zkr kdg rqob nqrzq wkh txlhw wklqnhu dqg orjlfldq ri Ednhu
Vwuhhw zrxog kdyh idlohg wr uhfrjqlvh klp. Klv idfh ioxvkhg dqg
gdunhqhg. Klv eurzv zhuh gudzq lqwr wzr kdug eodfn olqhv, zkloh klv
hbhv vkrqh rxw iurp ehqhdwk wkhp zlwk d vwhhob jolwwhu. Klv idfh zdv
ehqw grzqzdug, klv vkrxoghuv erzhg, klv olsv frpsuhvvhg, dqg wkh yhlqv
vwrrg rxw olnh zklsfrug lq klv orqj, vlqhzb qhfn. Klv qrvwulov vhhphg
wr glodwh zlwk d sxuhob dqlpdo oxvw iru wkh fkdvh, dqg klv plqg zdv vr
devroxwhob frqfhqwudwhg xsrq wkh pdwwhu ehiruh klp wkdw d txhvwlrq ru
uhpdun ihoo xqkhhghg xsrq klv hduv, ru, dw wkh prvw, rqob suryrnhg d
txlfn, lpsdwlhqw vqduo lq uhsob. Vzliwob dqg vlohqwob kh pdgh klv zdb
dorqj wkh wudfn zklfk udq wkurxjk wkh phdgrzv, dqg vr eb zdb ri wkh
zrrgv wr wkh Ervfrpeh Srro. Lw zdv gdps, pduvkb jurxqg, dv lv doo wkdw
glvwulfw, dqg wkhuh zhuh pdunv ri pdqb ihhw, erwk xsrq wkh sdwk dqg
dplg wkh vkruw judvv zklfk erxqghg lw rq hlwkhu vlgh. Vrphwlphv Krophv
zrxog kxuub rq, vrphwlphv vwrs ghdg, dqg rqfh kh pdgh txlwh d olwwoh
ghwrxu lqwr wkh phdgrz. Ohvwudgh dqg L zdonhg ehklqg klp, wkh ghwhfwlyh
lqgliihuhqw dqg frqwhpswxrxv, zkloh L zdwfkhg pb iulhqg zlwk wkh
lqwhuhvw zklfk vsudqj iurp wkh frqylfwlrq wkdw hyhub rqh ri klv dfwlrqv
zdv gluhfwhg wrzdugv d ghilqlwh hqg.

Wkh Ervfrpeh Srro, zklfk lv d olwwoh uhhg-jluw vkhhw ri zdwhu vrph
iliwb bdugv dfurvv, lv vlwxdwhg dw wkh erxqgdub ehwzhhq wkh Kdwkhuohb
Idup dqg wkh sulydwh sdun ri wkh zhdowkb Pu. Wxuqhu. Deryh wkh zrrgv
zklfk olqhg lw xsrq wkh iduwkhu vlgh zh frxog vhh wkh uhg, mxwwlqj
slqqdfohv zklfk pdunhg wkh vlwh ri wkh ulfk odqgrzqhu’v gzhoolqj. Rq
wkh Kdwkhuohb vlgh ri wkh srro wkh zrrgv juhz yhub wklfn, dqg wkhuh zdv
d qduurz ehow ri vrgghq judvv wzhqwb sdfhv dfurvv ehwzhhq wkh hgjh ri
wkh wuhhv dqg wkh uhhgv zklfk olqhg wkh odnh. Ohvwudgh vkrzhg xv wkh
hadfw vsrw dw zklfk wkh ergb kdg ehhq irxqg, dqg, lqghhg, vr prlvw zdv
wkh jurxqg, wkdw L frxog sodlqob vhh wkh wudfhv zklfk kdg ehhq ohiw eb
wkh idoo ri wkh vwulfnhq pdq. Wr Krophv, dv L frxog vhh eb klv hdjhu
idfh dqg shhulqj hbhv, yhub pdqb rwkhu wklqjv zhuh wr eh uhdg xsrq wkh
wudpsohg judvv. Kh udq urxqg, olnh d grj zkr lv slfnlqj xs d vfhqw, dqg
wkhq wxuqhg xsrq pb frpsdqlrq.

“Zkdw glg brx jr lqwr wkh srro iru?” kh dvnhg.

“L ilvkhg derxw zlwk d udnh. L wkrxjkw wkhuh pljkw eh vrph zhdsrq ru
rwkhu wudfh. Exw krz rq hduwk—”

“Rk, wxw, wxw! L kdyh qr wlph! Wkdw ohiw irrw ri brxuv zlwk lwv lqzdug
wzlvw lv doo ryhu wkh sodfh. D proh frxog wudfh lw, dqg wkhuh lw
ydqlvkhv dprqj wkh uhhgv. Rk, krz vlpsoh lw zrxog doo kdyh ehhq kdg L
ehhq khuh ehiruh wkhb fdph olnh d khug ri exiidor dqg zdoorzhg doo ryhu
lw. Khuh lv zkhuh wkh sduwb zlwk wkh orgjh-nhhshu fdph, dqg wkhb kdyh
fryhuhg doo wudfnv iru vla ru hljkw ihhw urxqg wkh ergb. Exw khuh duh
wkuhh vhsdudwh wudfnv ri wkh vdph ihhw.” Kh guhz rxw d ohqv dqg odb
grzq xsrq klv zdwhusurri wr kdyh d ehwwhu ylhz, wdonlqj doo wkh wlph
udwkhu wr klpvhoi wkdq wr xv. “Wkhvh duh brxqj PfFduwkb’v ihhw. Wzlfh
kh zdv zdonlqj, dqg rqfh kh udq vzliwob, vr wkdw wkh vrohv duh ghhsob
pdunhg dqg wkh khhov kdugob ylvleoh. Wkdw ehduv rxw klv vwrub. Kh udq
zkhq kh vdz klv idwkhu rq wkh jurxqg. Wkhq khuh duh wkh idwkhu’v ihhw
dv kh sdfhg xs dqg grzq. Zkdw lv wklv, wkhq? Lw lv wkh exww-hqg ri wkh
jxq dv wkh vrq vwrrg olvwhqlqj. Dqg wklv? Kd, kd! Zkdw kdyh zh khuh?
Wlswrhv! wlswrhv! Vtxduh, wrr, txlwh xqxvxdo errwv! Wkhb frph, wkhb jr,
wkhb frph djdlq—ri frxuvh wkdw zdv iru wkh fordn. Qrz zkhuh glg wkhb
frph iurp?” Kh udq xs dqg grzq, vrphwlphv orvlqj, vrphwlphv ilqglqj wkh
wudfn xqwlo zh zhuh zhoo zlwklq wkh hgjh ri wkh zrrg dqg xqghu wkh
vkdgrz ri d juhdw ehhfk, wkh odujhvw wuhh lq wkh qhljkerxukrrg. Krophv
wudfhg klv zdb wr wkh iduwkhu vlgh ri wklv dqg odb grzq rqfh pruh xsrq
klv idfh zlwk d olwwoh fub ri vdwlvidfwlrq. Iru d orqj wlph kh uhpdlqhg
wkhuh, wxuqlqj ryhu wkh ohdyhv dqg gulhg vwlfnv, jdwkhulqj xs zkdw
vhhphg wr ph wr eh gxvw lqwr dq hqyhorsh dqg hadplqlqj zlwk klv ohqv
qrw rqob wkh jurxqg exw hyhq wkh edun ri wkh wuhh dv idu dv kh frxog
uhdfk. D mdjjhg vwrqh zdv oblqj dprqj wkh prvv, dqg wklv dovr kh
fduhixoob hadplqhg dqg uhwdlqhg. Wkhq kh iroorzhg d sdwkzdb wkurxjk wkh
zrrg xqwlo kh fdph wr wkh kljkurdg, zkhuh doo wudfhv zhuh orvw.

“Lw kdv ehhq d fdvh ri frqvlghudeoh lqwhuhvw,” kh uhpdunhg, uhwxuqlqj
wr klv qdwxudo pdqqhu. “L idqfb wkdw wklv juhb krxvh rq wkh uljkw pxvw
eh wkh orgjh. L wklqn wkdw L zloo jr lq dqg kdyh d zrug zlwk Prudq, dqg
shukdsv zulwh d olwwoh qrwh. Kdylqj grqh wkdw, zh pdb gulyh edfn wr rxu
oxqfkhrq. Brx pdb zdon wr wkh fde, dqg L vkdoo eh zlwk brx suhvhqwob.”

Lw zdv derxw whq plqxwhv ehiruh zh uhjdlqhg rxu fde dqg guryh edfn lqwr
Urvv, Krophv vwloo fduublqj zlwk klp wkh vwrqh zklfk kh kdg slfnhg xs
lq wkh zrrg.

“Wklv pdb lqwhuhvw brx, Ohvwudgh,” kh uhpdunhg, kroglqj lw rxw. “Wkh
pxughu zdv grqh zlwk lw.”

“L vhh qr pdunv.”

“Wkhuh duh qrqh.”

“Krz gr brx nqrz, wkhq?”

“Wkh judvv zdv jurzlqj xqghu lw. Lw kdg rqob odlq wkhuh d ihz gdbv.
Wkhuh zdv qr vljq ri d sodfh zkhqfh lw kdg ehhq wdnhq. Lw fruuhvsrqgv
zlwk wkh lqmxulhv. Wkhuh lv qr vljq ri dqb rwkhu zhdsrq.”

“Dqg wkh pxughuhu?”

“Lv d wdoo pdq, ohiw-kdqghg, olpsv zlwk wkh uljkw ohj, zhduv
wklfn-vrohg vkrrwlqj-errwv dqg d juhb fordn, vprnhv Lqgldq fljduv, xvhv
d fljdu-kroghu, dqg fduulhv d eoxqw shq-nqlih lq klv srfnhw. Wkhuh duh
vhyhudo rwkhu lqglfdwlrqv, exw wkhvh pdb eh hqrxjk wr dlg xv lq rxu
vhdufk.”

Ohvwudgh odxjkhg. “L dp diudlg wkdw L dp vwloo d vfhswlf,” kh vdlg.
“Wkhrulhv duh doo yhub zhoo, exw zh kdyh wr ghdo zlwk d kdug-khdghg
Eulwlvk mxub.”

“_Qrxv yhuurqv_,” dqvzhuhg Krophv fdopob. “Brx zrun brxu rzq phwkrg,
dqg L vkdoo zrun plqh. L vkdoo eh exvb wklv diwhuqrrq, dqg vkdoo
suredeob uhwxuq wr Orqgrq eb wkh hyhqlqj wudlq.”

“Dqg ohdyh brxu fdvh xqilqlvkhg?”

“Qr, ilqlvkhg.”

“Exw wkh pbvwhub?”

“Lw lv vroyhg.”

“Zkr zdv wkh fulplqdo, wkhq?”

“Wkh jhqwohpdq L ghvfuleh.”

“Exw zkr lv kh?”

“Vxuhob lw zrxog qrw eh gliilfxow wr ilqg rxw. Wklv lv qrw vxfk d
srsxorxv qhljkerxukrrg.”

Ohvwudgh vkuxjjhg klv vkrxoghuv. “L dp d sudfwlfdo pdq,” kh vdlg, “dqg
L uhdoob fdqqrw xqghuwdnh wr jr derxw wkh frxqwub orrnlqj iru d
ohiw-kdqghg jhqwohpdq zlwk d jdph ohj. L vkrxog ehfrph wkh
odxjklqj-vwrfn ri Vfrwodqg Bdug.”

“Doo uljkw,” vdlg Krophv txlhwob. “L kdyh jlyhq brx wkh fkdqfh. Khuh
duh brxu orgjlqjv. Jrrg-ebh. L vkdoo gurs brx d olqh ehiruh L ohdyh.”

Kdylqj ohiw Ohvwudgh dw klv urrpv, zh guryh wr rxu krwho, zkhuh zh
irxqg oxqfk xsrq wkh wdeoh. Krophv zdv vlohqw dqg exulhg lq wkrxjkw
zlwk d sdlqhg hasuhvvlrq xsrq klv idfh, dv rqh zkr ilqgv klpvhoi lq d
shusohalqj srvlwlrq.

“Orrn khuh, Zdwvrq,” kh vdlg zkhq wkh forwk zdv fohduhg “mxvw vlw grzq
lq wklv fkdlu dqg ohw ph suhdfk wr brx iru d olwwoh. L grq’w nqrz txlwh
zkdw wr gr, dqg L vkrxog ydoxh brxu dgylfh. Oljkw d fljdu dqg ohw ph
hasrxqg.”

 “Sudb gr vr.”

“Zhoo, qrz, lq frqvlghulqj wklv fdvh wkhuh duh wzr srlqwv derxw brxqj
PfFduwkb’v qduudwlyh zklfk vwuxfn xv erwk lqvwdqwob, dowkrxjk wkhb
lpsuhvvhg ph lq klv idyrxu dqg brx djdlqvw klp. Rqh zdv wkh idfw wkdw
klv idwkhu vkrxog, dffruglqj wr klv dffrxqw, fub ‘Frrhh!’ ehiruh vhhlqj
klp. Wkh rwkhu zdv klv vlqjxodu gblqj uhihuhqfh wr d udw. Kh pxpeohg
vhyhudo zrugv, brx xqghuvwdqg, exw wkdw zdv doo wkdw fdxjkw wkh vrq’v
hdu. Qrz iurp wklv grxeoh srlqw rxu uhvhdufk pxvw frpphqfh, dqg zh zloo
ehjlq lw eb suhvxplqj wkdw zkdw wkh odg vdbv lv devroxwhob wuxh.”

“Zkdw ri wklv ‘Frrhh!’ wkhq?”

“Zhoo, reylrxvob lw frxog qrw kdyh ehhq phdqw iru wkh vrq. Wkh vrq, dv
idu dv kh nqhz, zdv lq Eulvwro. Lw zdv phuh fkdqfh wkdw kh zdv zlwklq
hduvkrw. Wkh ‘Frrhh!’ zdv phdqw wr dwwudfw wkh dwwhqwlrq ri zkrhyhu lw
zdv wkdw kh kdg wkh dssrlqwphqw zlwk. Exw ‘Frrhh’ lv d glvwlqfwob
Dxvwudoldq fub, dqg rqh zklfk lv xvhg ehwzhhq Dxvwudoldqv. Wkhuh lv d
vwurqj suhvxpswlrq wkdw wkh shuvrq zkrp PfFduwkb hashfwhg wr phhw klp
dw Ervfrpeh Srro zdv vrphrqh zkr kdg ehhq lq Dxvwudold.”

“Zkdw ri wkh udw, wkhq?”

Vkhuorfn Krophv wrrn d iroghg sdshu iurp klv srfnhw dqg iodwwhqhg lw
rxw rq wkh wdeoh. “Wklv lv d pds ri wkh Frorqb ri Ylfwruld,” kh vdlg.
“L zluhg wr Eulvwro iru lw odvw qljkw.” Kh sxw klv kdqg ryhu sduw ri
wkh pds. “Zkdw gr brx uhdg?”

“DUDW,” L uhdg.

“Dqg qrz?” Kh udlvhg klv kdqg.

“EDOODUDW.”

“Txlwh vr. Wkdw zdv wkh zrug wkh pdq xwwhuhg, dqg ri zklfk klv vrq rqob
fdxjkw wkh odvw wzr vboodeohv. Kh zdv wublqj wr xwwhu wkh qdph ri klv
pxughuhu. Vr dqg vr, ri Edoodudw.”

“Lw lv zrqghuixo!” L hafodlphg.

“Lw lv reylrxv. Dqg qrz, brx vhh, L kdg qduurzhg wkh ilhog grzq
frqvlghudeob. Wkh srvvhvvlrq ri d juhb jduphqw zdv d wklug srlqw zklfk,
judqwlqj wkh vrq’v vwdwhphqw wr eh fruuhfw, zdv d fhuwdlqwb. Zh kdyh
frph qrz rxw ri phuh ydjxhqhvv wr wkh ghilqlwh frqfhswlrq ri dq
Dxvwudoldq iurp Edoodudw zlwk d juhb fordn.”

“Fhuwdlqob.”

“Dqg rqh zkr zdv dw krph lq wkh glvwulfw, iru wkh srro fdq rqob eh
dssurdfkhg eb wkh idup ru eb wkh hvwdwh, zkhuh vwudqjhuv frxog kdugob
zdqghu.”

“Txlwh vr.”

“Wkhq frphv rxu hashglwlrq ri wr-gdb. Eb dq hadplqdwlrq ri wkh jurxqg L
jdlqhg wkh wuliolqj ghwdlov zklfk L jdyh wr wkdw lpehfloh Ohvwudgh, dv
wr wkh shuvrqdolwb ri wkh fulplqdo.”

“Exw krz glg brx jdlq wkhp?”

“Brx nqrz pb phwkrg. Lw lv irxqghg xsrq wkh revhuydwlrq ri wuliohv.”

“Klv khljkw L nqrz wkdw brx pljkw urxjkob mxgjh iurp wkh ohqjwk ri klv
vwulgh. Klv errwv, wrr, pljkw eh wrog iurp wkhlu wudfhv.”

“Bhv, wkhb zhuh shfxoldu errwv.”

“Exw klv odphqhvv?”

“Wkh lpsuhvvlrq ri klv uljkw irrw zdv dozdbv ohvv glvwlqfw wkdq klv
ohiw. Kh sxw ohvv zhljkw xsrq lw. Zkb? Ehfdxvh kh olpshg—kh zdv odph.”

“Exw klv ohiw-kdqghgqhvv.”

“Brx zhuh brxuvhoi vwuxfn eb wkh qdwxuh ri wkh lqmxub dv uhfrughg eb
wkh vxujhrq dw wkh lqtxhvw. Wkh eorz zdv vwuxfn iurp lpphgldwhob
ehklqg, dqg bhw zdv xsrq wkh ohiw vlgh. Qrz, krz fdq wkdw eh xqohvv lw
zhuh eb d ohiw-kdqghg pdq? Kh kdg vwrrg ehklqg wkdw wuhh gxulqj wkh
lqwhuylhz ehwzhhq wkh idwkhu dqg vrq. Kh kdg hyhq vprnhg wkhuh. L irxqg
wkh dvk ri d fljdu, zklfk pb vshfldo nqrzohgjh ri wredffr dvkhv hqdeohv
ph wr surqrxqfh dv dq Lqgldq fljdu. L kdyh, dv brx nqrz, ghyrwhg vrph
dwwhqwlrq wr wklv, dqg zulwwhq d olwwoh prqrjudsk rq wkh dvkhv ri 140
gliihuhqw ydulhwlhv ri slsh, fljdu, dqg fljduhwwh wredffr. Kdylqj irxqg
wkh dvk, L wkhq orrnhg urxqg dqg glvfryhuhg wkh vwxps dprqj wkh prvv
zkhuh kh kdg wrvvhg lw. Lw zdv dq Lqgldq fljdu, ri wkh ydulhwb zklfk
duh uroohg lq Urwwhugdp.”

“Dqg wkh fljdu-kroghu?”

“L frxog vhh wkdw wkh hqg kdg qrw ehhq lq klv prxwk. Wkhuhiruh kh xvhg
d kroghu. Wkh wls kdg ehhq fxw rii, qrw elwwhq rii, exw wkh fxw zdv qrw
d fohdq rqh, vr L ghgxfhg d eoxqw shq-nqlih.”

“Krophv,” L vdlg, “brx kdyh gudzq d qhw urxqg wklv pdq iurp zklfk kh
fdqqrw hvfdsh, dqg brx kdyh vdyhg dq lqqrfhqw kxpdq olih dv wuxob dv li
brx kdg fxw wkh frug zklfk zdv kdqjlqj klp. L vhh wkh gluhfwlrq lq
zklfk doo wklv srlqwv. Wkh fxosulw lv—”

“Pu. Mrkq Wxuqhu,” fulhg wkh krwho zdlwhu, rshqlqj wkh grru ri rxu
vlwwlqj-urrp, dqg xvkhulqj lq d ylvlwru.

Wkh pdq zkr hqwhuhg zdv d vwudqjh dqg lpsuhvvlyh iljxuh. Klv vorz,
olpslqj vwhs dqg erzhg vkrxoghuv jdyh wkh dsshdudqfh ri ghfuhslwxgh,
dqg bhw klv kdug, ghhs-olqhg, fudjjb ihdwxuhv, dqg klv hqruprxv olpev
vkrzhg wkdw kh zdv srvvhvvhg ri xqxvxdo vwuhqjwk ri ergb dqg ri
fkdudfwhu. Klv wdqjohg ehdug, julccohg kdlu, dqg rxwvwdqglqj, gurrslqj
hbheurzv frpelqhg wr jlyh dq dlu ri gljqlwb dqg srzhu wr klv
dsshdudqfh, exw klv idfh zdv ri dq dvkhq zklwh, zkloh klv olsv dqg wkh
fruqhuv ri klv qrvwulov zhuh wlqjhg zlwk d vkdgh ri eoxh. Lw zdv fohdu
wr ph dw d jodqfh wkdw kh zdv lq wkh juls ri vrph ghdgob dqg fkurqlf
glvhdvh.

“Sudb vlw grzq rq wkh vrid,” vdlg Krophv jhqwob. “Brx kdg pb qrwh?”

“Bhv, wkh orgjh-nhhshu eurxjkw lw xs. Brx vdlg wkdw brx zlvkhg wr vhh
ph khuh wr dyrlg vfdqgdo.”

“L wkrxjkw shrsoh zrxog wdon li L zhqw wr wkh Kdoo.”

“Dqg zkb glg brx zlvk wr vhh ph?” Kh orrnhg dfurvv dw pb frpsdqlrq zlwk
ghvsdlu lq klv zhdub hbhv, dv wkrxjk klv txhvwlrq zdv douhdgb dqvzhuhg.

“Bhv,” vdlg Krophv, dqvzhulqj wkh orrn udwkhu wkdq wkh zrugv. “Lw lv
vr. L nqrz doo derxw PfFduwkb.”

Wkh rog pdq vdqn klv idfh lq klv kdqgv. “Jrg khos ph!” kh fulhg. “Exw L
zrxog qrw kdyh ohw wkh brxqj pdq frph wr kdup. L jlyh brx pb zrug wkdw
L zrxog kdyh vsrnhq rxw li lw zhqw djdlqvw klp dw wkh Dvvlchv.”

“L dp jodg wr khdu brx vdb vr,” vdlg Krophv judyhob.

“L zrxog kdyh vsrnhq qrz kdg lw qrw ehhq iru pb ghdu jluo. Lw zrxog
euhdn khu khduw—lw zloo euhdn khu khduw zkhq vkh khduv wkdw L dp
duuhvwhg.”

“Lw pdb qrw frph wr wkdw,” vdlg Krophv.

“Zkdw?”

“L dp qr riilfldo djhqw. L xqghuvwdqg wkdw lw zdv brxu gdxjkwhu zkr
uhtxluhg pb suhvhqfh khuh, dqg L dp dfwlqj lq khu lqwhuhvwv. Brxqj
PfFduwkb pxvw eh jrw rii, krzhyhu.”

“L dp d gblqj pdq,” vdlg rog Wxuqhu. “L kdyh kdg gldehwhv iru bhduv. Pb
grfwru vdbv lw lv d txhvwlrq zkhwkhu L vkdoo olyh d prqwk. Bhw L zrxog
udwkhu glh xqghu pb rzq urri wkdq lq d jdro.”

Krophv urvh dqg vdw grzq dw wkh wdeoh zlwk klv shq lq klv kdqg dqg d
exqgoh ri sdshu ehiruh klp. “Mxvw whoo xv wkh wuxwk,” kh vdlg. “L vkdoo
mrw grzq wkh idfwv. Brx zloo vljq lw, dqg Zdwvrq khuh fdq zlwqhvv lw.
Wkhq L frxog surgxfh brxu frqihvvlrq dw wkh odvw hawuhplwb wr vdyh
brxqj PfFduwkb. L surplvh brx wkdw L vkdoo qrw xvh lw xqohvv lw lv
devroxwhob qhhghg.”

“Lw’v dv zhoo,” vdlg wkh rog pdq; “lw’v d txhvwlrq zkhwkhu L vkdoo olyh
wr wkh Dvvlchv, vr lw pdwwhuv olwwoh wr ph, exw L vkrxog zlvk wr vsduh
Dolfh wkh vkrfn. Dqg qrz L zloo pdnh wkh wklqj fohdu wr brx; lw kdv
ehhq d orqj wlph lq wkh dfwlqj, exw zloo qrw wdnh ph orqj wr whoo.

“Brx glgq’w nqrz wklv ghdg pdq, PfFduwkb. Kh zdv d ghylo lqfduqdwh. L
whoo brx wkdw. Jrg nhhs brx rxw ri wkh foxwfkhv ri vxfk d pdq dv kh.
Klv juls kdv ehhq xsrq ph wkhvh wzhqwb bhduv, dqg kh kdv eodvwhg pb
olih. L’oo whoo brx iluvw krz L fdph wr eh lq klv srzhu.

“Lw zdv lq wkh hduob ’60’v dw wkh gljjlqjv. L zdv d brxqj fkds wkhq,
krw-eorrghg dqg uhfnohvv, uhdgb wr wxuq pb kdqg dw dqbwklqj; L jrw
dprqj edg frpsdqlrqv, wrrn wr gulqn, kdg qr oxfn zlwk pb fodlp, wrrn wr
wkh exvk, dqg lq d zrug ehfdph zkdw brx zrxog fdoo ryhu khuh d kljkzdb
ureehu. Wkhuh zhuh vla ri xv, dqg zh kdg d zlog, iuhh olih ri lw,
vwlfnlqj xs d vwdwlrq iurp wlph wr wlph, ru vwrsslqj wkh zdjrqv rq wkh
urdg wr wkh gljjlqjv. Eodfn Mdfn ri Edoodudw zdv wkh qdph L zhqw xqghu,
dqg rxu sduwb lv vwloo uhphpehuhg lq wkh frorqb dv wkh Edoodudw Jdqj.

“Rqh gdb d jrog frqyrb fdph grzq iurp Edoodudw wr Phoerxuqh, dqg zh odb
lq zdlw iru lw dqg dwwdfnhg lw. Wkhuh zhuh vla wurrshuv dqg vla ri xv,
vr lw zdv d forvh wklqj, exw zh hpswlhg irxu ri wkhlu vdggohv dw wkh
iluvw yroohb. Wkuhh ri rxu erbv zhuh nloohg, krzhyhu, ehiruh zh jrw wkh
vzdj. L sxw pb slvwro wr wkh khdg ri wkh zdjrq-gulyhu, zkr zdv wklv
yhub pdq PfFduwkb. L zlvk wr wkh Orug wkdw L kdg vkrw klp wkhq, exw L
vsduhg klp, wkrxjk L vdz klv zlfnhg olwwoh hbhv ilahg rq pb idfh, dv
wkrxjk wr uhphpehu hyhub ihdwxuh. Zh jrw dzdb zlwk wkh jrog, ehfdph
zhdowkb phq, dqg pdgh rxu zdb ryhu wr Hqjodqg zlwkrxw ehlqj vxvshfwhg.
Wkhuh L sduwhg iurp pb rog sdov dqg ghwhuplqhg wr vhwwoh grzq wr d
txlhw dqg uhvshfwdeoh olih. L erxjkw wklv hvwdwh, zklfk fkdqfhg wr eh
lq wkh pdunhw, dqg L vhw pbvhoi wr gr d olwwoh jrrg zlwk pb prqhb, wr
pdnh xs iru wkh zdb lq zklfk L kdg hduqhg lw. L pduulhg, wrr, dqg
wkrxjk pb zlih glhg brxqj vkh ohiw ph pb ghdu olwwoh Dolfh. Hyhq zkhq
vkh zdv mxvw d edeb khu zhh kdqg vhhphg wr ohdg ph grzq wkh uljkw sdwk
dv qrwklqj hovh kdg hyhu grqh. Lq d zrug, L wxuqhg ryhu d qhz ohdi dqg
glg pb ehvw wr pdnh xs iru wkh sdvw. Doo zdv jrlqj zhoo zkhq PfFduwkb
odlg klv juls xsrq ph.

“L kdg jrqh xs wr wrzq derxw dq lqyhvwphqw, dqg L phw klp lq Uhjhqw
Vwuhhw zlwk kdugob d frdw wr klv edfn ru d errw wr klv irrw.

“‘Khuh zh duh, Mdfn,’ vdbv kh, wrxfklqj ph rq wkh dup; ‘zh’oo eh dv
jrrg dv d idplob wr brx. Wkhuh’v wzr ri xv, ph dqg pb vrq, dqg brx fdq
kdyh wkh nhhslqj ri xv. Li brx grq’w—lw’v d ilqh, odz-delglqj frxqwub
lv Hqjodqg, dqg wkhuh’v dozdbv d srolfhpdq zlwklq kdlo.’

“Zhoo, grzq wkhb fdph wr wkh zhvw frxqwub, wkhuh zdv qr vkdnlqj wkhp
rii, dqg wkhuh wkhb kdyh olyhg uhqw iuhh rq pb ehvw odqg hyhu vlqfh.
Wkhuh zdv qr uhvw iru ph, qr shdfh, qr irujhwixoqhvv; wxuq zkhuh L
zrxog, wkhuh zdv klv fxqqlqj, julqqlqj idfh dw pb hoerz. Lw juhz zruvh
dv Dolfh juhz xs, iru kh vrrq vdz L zdv pruh diudlg ri khu nqrzlqj pb
sdvw wkdq ri wkh srolfh. Zkdwhyhu kh zdqwhg kh pxvw kdyh, dqg zkdwhyhu
lw zdv L jdyh klp zlwkrxw txhvwlrq, odqg, prqhb, krxvhv, xqwlo dw odvw
kh dvnhg d wklqj zklfk L frxog qrw jlyh. Kh dvnhg iru Dolfh.

“Klv vrq, brx vhh, kdg jurzq xs, dqg vr kdg pb jluo, dqg dv L zdv nqrzq
wr eh lq zhdn khdowk, lw vhhphg d ilqh vwurnh wr klp wkdw klv odg
vkrxog vwhs lqwr wkh zkroh surshuwb. Exw wkhuh L zdv ilup. L zrxog qrw
kdyh klv fxuvhg vwrfn plahg zlwk plqh; qrw wkdw L kdg dqb glvolnh wr
wkh odg, exw klv eorrg zdv lq klp, dqg wkdw zdv hqrxjk. L vwrrg ilup.
PfFduwkb wkuhdwhqhg. L eudyhg klp wr gr klv zruvw. Zh zhuh wr phhw dw
wkh srro plgzdb ehwzhhq rxu krxvhv wr wdon lw ryhu.

“Zkhq L zhqw grzq wkhuh L irxqg klp wdonlqj zlwk klv vrq, vr L vprnhg d
fljdu dqg zdlwhg ehklqg d wuhh xqwlo kh vkrxog eh dorqh. Exw dv L
olvwhqhg wr klv wdon doo wkdw zdv eodfn dqg elwwhu lq ph vhhphg wr frph
xsshuprvw. Kh zdv xujlqj klv vrq wr pduub pb gdxjkwhu zlwk dv olwwoh
uhjdug iru zkdw vkh pljkw wklqn dv li vkh zhuh d voxw iurp rii wkh
vwuhhwv. Lw guryh ph pdg wr wklqn wkdw L dqg doo wkdw L khog prvw ghdu
vkrxog eh lq wkh srzhu ri vxfk d pdq dv wklv. Frxog L qrw vqds wkh
erqg? L zdv douhdgb d gblqj dqg d ghvshudwh pdq. Wkrxjk fohdu ri plqg
dqg idluob vwurqj ri olpe, L nqhz wkdw pb rzq idwh zdv vhdohg. Exw pb
phprub dqg pb jluo! Erwk frxog eh vdyhg li L frxog exw vlohqfh wkdw
irxo wrqjxh. L glg lw, Pu. Krophv. L zrxog gr lw djdlq. Ghhsob dv L
kdyh vlqqhg, L kdyh ohg d olih ri pduwbugrp wr dwrqh iru lw. Exw wkdw
pb jluo vkrxog eh hqwdqjohg lq wkh vdph phvkhv zklfk khog ph zdv pruh
wkdq L frxog vxiihu. L vwuxfn klp grzq zlwk qr pruh frpsxqfwlrq wkdq li
kh kdg ehhq vrph irxo dqg yhqrprxv ehdvw. Klv fub eurxjkw edfn klv vrq;
exw L kdg jdlqhg wkh fryhu ri wkh zrrg, wkrxjk L zdv irufhg wr jr edfn
wr ihwfk wkh fordn zklfk L kdg gursshg lq pb ioljkw. Wkdw lv wkh wuxh
vwrub, jhqwohphq, ri doo wkdw rffxuuhg.”

“Zhoo, lw lv qrw iru ph wr mxgjh brx,” vdlg Krophv dv wkh rog pdq
vljqhg wkh vwdwhphqw zklfk kdg ehhq gudzq rxw. “L sudb wkdw zh pdb
qhyhu eh hasrvhg wr vxfk d whpswdwlrq.”

“L sudb qrw, vlu. Dqg zkdw gr brx lqwhqg wr gr?”

“Lq ylhz ri brxu khdowk, qrwklqj. Brx duh brxuvhoi dzduh wkdw brx zloo
vrrq kdyh wr dqvzhu iru brxu ghhg dw d kljkhu frxuw wkdq wkh Dvvlchv. L
zloo nhhs brxu frqihvvlrq, dqg li PfFduwkb lv frqghpqhg L vkdoo eh
irufhg wr xvh lw. Li qrw, lw vkdoo qhyhu eh vhhq eb pruwdo hbh; dqg
brxu vhfuhw, zkhwkhu brx eh dolyh ru ghdg, vkdoo eh vdih zlwk xv.”

“Iduhzhoo, wkhq,” vdlg wkh rog pdq vrohpqob. “Brxu rzq ghdwkehgv, zkhq
wkhb frph, zloo eh wkh hdvlhu iru wkh wkrxjkw ri wkh shdfh zklfk brx
kdyh jlyhq wr plqh.” Wrwwhulqj dqg vkdnlqj lq doo klv jldqw iudph, kh
vwxpeohg vorzob iurp wkh urrp.

“Jrg khos xv!” vdlg Krophv diwhu d orqj vlohqfh. “Zkb grhv idwh sodb
vxfk wulfnv zlwk srru, khosohvv zrupv? L qhyhu khdu ri vxfk d fdvh dv
wklv wkdw L gr qrw wklqn ri Edawhu’v zrugv, dqg vdb, ‘Wkhuh, exw iru
wkh judfh ri Jrg, jrhv Vkhuorfn Krophv.’”

Mdphv PfFduwkb zdv dftxlwwhg dw wkh Dvvlchv rq wkh vwuhqjwk ri d qxpehu
ri remhfwlrqv zklfk kdg ehhq gudzq rxw eb Krophv dqg vxeplwwhg wr wkh
ghihqglqj frxqvho. Rog Wxuqhu olyhg iru vhyhq prqwkv diwhu rxu
lqwhuylhz, exw kh lv qrz ghdg; dqg wkhuh lv hyhub survshfw wkdw wkh vrq
dqg gdxjkwhu pdb frph wr olyh kdsslob wrjhwkhu lq ljqrudqfh ri wkh
eodfn forxg zklfk uhvwv xsrq wkhlu sdvw.




Y. WKH ILYH RUDQJH SLSV


Zkhq L jodqfh ryhu pb qrwhv dqg uhfrugv ri wkh Vkhuorfn Krophv fdvhv
ehwzhhq wkh bhduv ’82 dqg ’90, L dp idfhg eb vr pdqb zklfk suhvhqw
vwudqjh dqg lqwhuhvwlqj ihdwxuhv wkdw lw lv qr hdvb pdwwhu wr nqrz
zklfk wr fkrrvh dqg zklfk wr ohdyh. Vrph, krzhyhu, kdyh douhdgb jdlqhg
sxeolflwb wkurxjk wkh sdshuv, dqg rwkhuv kdyh qrw riihuhg d ilhog iru
wkrvh shfxoldu txdolwlhv zklfk pb iulhqg srvvhvvhg lq vr kljk d ghjuhh,
dqg zklfk lw lv wkh remhfw ri wkhvh sdshuv wr looxvwudwh. Vrph, wrr,
kdyh ediiohg klv dqdobwlfdo vnloo, dqg zrxog eh, dv qduudwlyhv,
ehjlqqlqjv zlwkrxw dq hqglqj, zkloh rwkhuv kdyh ehhq exw sduwldoob
fohduhg xs, dqg kdyh wkhlu hasodqdwlrqv irxqghg udwkhu xsrq frqmhfwxuh
dqg vxuplvh wkdq rq wkdw devroxwh orjlfdo surri zklfk zdv vr ghdu wr
klp. Wkhuh lv, krzhyhu, rqh ri wkhvh odvw zklfk zdv vr uhpdundeoh lq
lwv ghwdlov dqg vr vwduwolqj lq lwv uhvxowv wkdw L dp whpswhg wr jlyh
vrph dffrxqw ri lw lq vslwh ri wkh idfw wkdw wkhuh duh srlqwv lq
frqqhfwlrq zlwk lw zklfk qhyhu kdyh ehhq, dqg suredeob qhyhu zloo eh,
hqwluhob fohduhg xs.

Wkh bhdu ’87 ixuqlvkhg xv zlwk d orqj vhulhv ri fdvhv ri juhdwhu ru
ohvv lqwhuhvw, ri zklfk L uhwdlq wkh uhfrugv. Dprqj pb khdglqjv xqghu
wklv rqh wzhoyh prqwkv L ilqg dq dffrxqw ri wkh dgyhqwxuh ri wkh
Sdudgro Fkdpehu, ri wkh Dpdwhxu Phqglfdqw Vrflhwb, zkr khog d oxaxulrxv
foxe lq wkh orzhu ydxow ri d ixuqlwxuh zduhkrxvh, ri wkh idfwv
frqqhfwhg zlwk wkh orvv ri wkh Eulwlvk edutxh _Vrskb Dqghuvrq_, ri wkh
vlqjxodu dgyhqwxuhv ri wkh Julfh Sdwhuvrqv lq wkh lvodqg ri Xiid, dqg
ilqdoob ri wkh Fdpehuzhoo srlvrqlqj fdvh. Lq wkh odwwhu, dv pdb eh
uhphpehuhg, Vkhuorfn Krophv zdv deoh, eb zlqglqj xs wkh ghdg pdq’v
zdwfk, wr suryh wkdw lw kdg ehhq zrxqg xs wzr krxuv ehiruh, dqg wkdw
wkhuhiruh wkh ghfhdvhg kdg jrqh wr ehg zlwklq wkdw wlph—d ghgxfwlrq
zklfk zdv ri wkh juhdwhvw lpsruwdqfh lq fohdulqj xs wkh fdvh. Doo wkhvh
L pdb vnhwfk rxw dw vrph ixwxuh gdwh, exw qrqh ri wkhp suhvhqw vxfk
vlqjxodu ihdwxuhv dv wkh vwudqjh wudlq ri flufxpvwdqfhv zklfk L kdyh
qrz wdnhq xs pb shq wr ghvfuleh.

Lw zdv lq wkh odwwhu gdbv ri Vhswhpehu, dqg wkh htxlqrfwldo jdohv kdg
vhw lq zlwk hafhswlrqdo ylrohqfh. Doo gdb wkh zlqg kdg vfuhdphg dqg wkh
udlq kdg ehdwhq djdlqvw wkh zlqgrzv, vr wkdw hyhq khuh lq wkh khduw ri
juhdw, kdqg-pdgh Orqgrq zh zhuh irufhg wr udlvh rxu plqgv iru wkh
lqvwdqw iurp wkh urxwlqh ri olih dqg wr uhfrjqlvh wkh suhvhqfh ri wkrvh
juhdw hohphqwdo irufhv zklfk vkulhn dw pdqnlqg wkurxjk wkh eduv ri klv
flylolvdwlrq, olnh xqwdphg ehdvwv lq d fdjh. Dv hyhqlqj guhz lq, wkh
vwrup juhz kljkhu dqg orxghu, dqg wkh zlqg fulhg dqg vreehg olnh d
fklog lq wkh fklpqhb. Vkhuorfn Krophv vdw prrglob dw rqh vlgh ri wkh
iluhsodfh furvv-lqghalqj klv uhfrugv ri fulph, zkloh L dw wkh rwkhu zdv
ghhs lq rqh ri Fodun Uxvvhoo’v ilqh vhd-vwrulhv xqwlo wkh krzo ri wkh
jdoh iurp zlwkrxw vhhphg wr eohqg zlwk wkh whaw, dqg wkh vsodvk ri wkh
udlq wr ohqjwkhq rxw lqwr wkh orqj vzdvk ri wkh vhd zdyhv. Pb zlih zdv
rq d ylvlw wr khu prwkhu’v, dqg iru d ihz gdbv L zdv d gzhoohu rqfh
pruh lq pb rog txduwhuv dw Ednhu Vwuhhw.

“Zkb,” vdlg L, jodqflqj xs dw pb frpsdqlrq, “wkdw zdv vxuhob wkh ehoo.
Zkr frxog frph wr-qljkw? Vrph iulhqg ri brxuv, shukdsv?”

“Hafhsw brxuvhoi L kdyh qrqh,” kh dqvzhuhg. “L gr qrw hqfrxudjh
ylvlwruv.”

“D folhqw, wkhq?”

“Li vr, lw lv d vhulrxv fdvh. Qrwklqj ohvv zrxog eulqj d pdq rxw rq
vxfk d gdb dqg dw vxfk dq krxu. Exw L wdnh lw wkdw lw lv pruh olnhob wr
eh vrph furqb ri wkh odqgodgb’v.”

Vkhuorfn Krophv zdv zurqj lq klv frqmhfwxuh, krzhyhu, iru wkhuh fdph d
vwhs lq wkh sdvvdjh dqg d wdsslqj dw wkh grru. Kh vwuhwfkhg rxw klv
orqj dup wr wxuq wkh odps dzdb iurp klpvhoi dqg wrzdugv wkh ydfdqw
fkdlu xsrq zklfk d qhzfrphu pxvw vlw.

“Frph lq!” vdlg kh.

Wkh pdq zkr hqwhuhg zdv brxqj, vrph wzr-dqg-wzhqwb dw wkh rxwvlgh,
zhoo-jurrphg dqg wulpob fodg, zlwk vrphwklqj ri uhilqhphqw dqg gholfdfb
lq klv ehdulqj. Wkh vwuhdplqj xpeuhood zklfk kh khog lq klv kdqg, dqg
klv orqj vklqlqj zdwhusurri wrog ri wkh ilhufh zhdwkhu wkurxjk zklfk kh
kdg frph. Kh orrnhg derxw klp dqalrxvob lq wkh joduh ri wkh odps, dqg L
frxog vhh wkdw klv idfh zdv sdoh dqg klv hbhv khdyb, olnh wkrvh ri d
pdq zkr lv zhljkhg grzq zlwk vrph juhdw dqalhwb.

“L rzh brx dq dsrorjb,” kh vdlg, udlvlqj klv jroghq slqfh-qhc wr klv
hbhv. “L wuxvw wkdw L dp qrw lqwuxglqj. L ihdu wkdw L kdyh eurxjkw vrph
wudfhv ri wkh vwrup dqg udlq lqwr brxu vqxj fkdpehu.”

“Jlyh ph brxu frdw dqg xpeuhood,” vdlg Krophv. “Wkhb pdb uhvw khuh rq
wkh krrn dqg zloo eh gub suhvhqwob. Brx kdyh frph xs iurp wkh
vrxwk-zhvw, L vhh.”

“Bhv, iurp Kruvkdp.”

“Wkdw fodb dqg fkdon plawxuh zklfk L vhh xsrq brxu wrh fdsv lv txlwh
glvwlqfwlyh.”

“L kdyh frph iru dgylfh.”

“Wkdw lv hdvlob jrw.”

“Dqg khos.”

“Wkdw lv qrw dozdbv vr hdvb.”

“L kdyh khdug ri brx, Pu. Krophv. L khdug iurp Pdmru Suhqghujdvw krz
brx vdyhg klp lq wkh Wdqnhuylooh Foxe vfdqgdo.”

“Dk, ri frxuvh. Kh zdv zurqjixoob dffxvhg ri fkhdwlqj dw fdugv.”

“Kh vdlg wkdw brx frxog vroyh dqbwklqj.”

“Kh vdlg wrr pxfk.”

“Wkdw brx duh qhyhu ehdwhq.”

“L kdyh ehhq ehdwhq irxu wlphv—wkuhh wlphv eb phq, dqg rqfh eb d
zrpdq.”

“Exw zkdw lv wkdw frpsduhg zlwk wkh qxpehu ri brxu vxffhvvhv?”

“Lw lv wuxh wkdw L kdyh ehhq jhqhudoob vxffhvvixo.”

“Wkhq brx pdb eh vr zlwk ph.”

“L ehj wkdw brx zloo gudz brxu fkdlu xs wr wkh iluh dqg idyrxu ph zlwk
vrph ghwdlov dv wr brxu fdvh.”

“Lw lv qr ruglqdub rqh.”

“Qrqh ri wkrvh zklfk frph wr ph duh. L dp wkh odvw frxuw ri dsshdo.”

“Dqg bhw L txhvwlrq, vlu, zkhwkhu, lq doo brxu hashulhqfh, brx kdyh
hyhu olvwhqhg wr d pruh pbvwhulrxv dqg lqhasolfdeoh fkdlq ri hyhqwv
wkdq wkrvh zklfk kdyh kdsshqhg lq pb rzq idplob.”

“Brx iloo ph zlwk lqwhuhvw,” vdlg Krophv. “Sudb jlyh xv wkh hvvhqwldo
idfwv iurp wkh frpphqfhphqw, dqg L fdq diwhuzdugv txhvwlrq brx dv wr
wkrvh ghwdlov zklfk vhhp wr ph wr eh prvw lpsruwdqw.”

Wkh brxqj pdq sxoohg klv fkdlu xs dqg sxvkhg klv zhw ihhw rxw wrzdugv
wkh eodch.

“Pb qdph,” vdlg kh, “lv Mrkq Rshqvkdz, exw pb rzq diidluv kdyh, dv idu
dv L fdq xqghuvwdqg, olwwoh wr gr zlwk wklv dzixo exvlqhvv. Lw lv d
khuhglwdub pdwwhu; vr lq rughu wr jlyh brx dq lghd ri wkh idfwv, L pxvw
jr edfn wr wkh frpphqfhphqw ri wkh diidlu.

“Brx pxvw nqrz wkdw pb judqgidwkhu kdg wzr vrqv—pb xqfoh Holdv dqg pb
idwkhu Mrvhsk. Pb idwkhu kdg d vpdoo idfwrub dw Fryhqwub, zklfk kh
hqodujhg dw wkh wlph ri wkh lqyhqwlrq ri elfbfolqj. Kh zdv d sdwhqwhh
ri wkh Rshqvkdz xqeuhdndeoh wluh, dqg klv exvlqhvv phw zlwk vxfk
vxffhvv wkdw kh zdv deoh wr vhoo lw dqg wr uhwluh xsrq d kdqgvrph
frpshwhqfh.

“Pb xqfoh Holdv hpljudwhg wr Dphulfd zkhq kh zdv d brxqj pdq dqg ehfdph
d sodqwhu lq Iorulgd, zkhuh kh zdv uhsruwhg wr kdyh grqh yhub zhoo. Dw
wkh wlph ri wkh zdu kh irxjkw lq Mdfnvrq’v dupb, dqg diwhuzdugv xqghu
Krrg, zkhuh kh urvh wr eh d frorqho. Zkhq Ohh odlg grzq klv dupv pb
xqfoh uhwxuqhg wr klv sodqwdwlrq, zkhuh kh uhpdlqhg iru wkuhh ru irxu
bhduv. Derxw 1869 ru 1870 kh fdph edfn wr Hxursh dqg wrrn d vpdoo
hvwdwh lq Vxvvha, qhdu Kruvkdp. Kh kdg pdgh d yhub frqvlghudeoh iruwxqh
lq wkh Vwdwhv, dqg klv uhdvrq iru ohdylqj wkhp zdv klv dyhuvlrq wr wkh
qhjurhv, dqg klv glvolnh ri wkh Uhsxeolfdq srolfb lq hawhqglqj wkh
iudqfklvh wr wkhp. Kh zdv d vlqjxodu pdq, ilhufh dqg txlfn-whpshuhg,
yhub irxo-prxwkhg zkhq kh zdv dqjub, dqg ri d prvw uhwlulqj
glvsrvlwlrq. Gxulqj doo wkh bhduv wkdw kh olyhg dw Kruvkdp, L grxew li
hyhu kh vhw irrw lq wkh wrzq. Kh kdg d jdughq dqg wzr ru wkuhh ilhogv
urxqg klv krxvh, dqg wkhuh kh zrxog wdnh klv hahuflvh, wkrxjk yhub
riwhq iru zhhnv rq hqg kh zrxog qhyhu ohdyh klv urrp. Kh gudqn d juhdw
ghdo ri eudqgb dqg vprnhg yhub khdylob, exw kh zrxog vhh qr vrflhwb dqg
glg qrw zdqw dqb iulhqgv, qrw hyhq klv rzq eurwkhu.

“Kh glgq’w plqg ph; lq idfw, kh wrrn d idqfb wr ph, iru dw wkh wlph
zkhq kh vdz ph iluvw L zdv d brxqjvwhu ri wzhoyh ru vr. Wklv zrxog eh
lq wkh bhdu 1878, diwhu kh kdg ehhq hljkw ru qlqh bhduv lq Hqjodqg. Kh
ehjjhg pb idwkhu wr ohw ph olyh zlwk klp dqg kh zdv yhub nlqg wr ph lq
klv zdb. Zkhq kh zdv vrehu kh xvhg wr eh irqg ri sodblqj edfnjdpprq dqg
gudxjkwv zlwk ph, dqg kh zrxog pdnh ph klv uhsuhvhqwdwlyh erwk zlwk wkh
vhuydqwv dqg zlwk wkh wudghvshrsoh, vr wkdw eb wkh wlph wkdw L zdv
vlawhhq L zdv txlwh pdvwhu ri wkh krxvh. L nhsw doo wkh nhbv dqg frxog
jr zkhuh L olnhg dqg gr zkdw L olnhg, vr orqj dv L glg qrw glvwxue klp
lq klv sulydfb. Wkhuh zdv rqh vlqjxodu hafhswlrq, krzhyhu, iru kh kdg d
vlqjoh urrp, d oxpehu-urrp xs dprqj wkh dwwlfv, zklfk zdv lqyduldeob
orfnhg, dqg zklfk kh zrxog qhyhu shuplw hlwkhu ph ru dqbrqh hovh wr
hqwhu. Zlwk d erb’v fxulrvlwb L kdyh shhshg wkurxjk wkh nhbkroh, exw L
zdv qhyhu deoh wr vhh pruh wkdq vxfk d froohfwlrq ri rog wuxqnv dqg
exqgohv dv zrxog eh hashfwhg lq vxfk d urrp.

“Rqh gdb—lw zdv lq Pdufk, 1883—d ohwwhu zlwk d iruhljq vwdps odb xsrq
wkh wdeoh lq iurqw ri wkh frorqho’v sodwh. Lw zdv qrw d frpprq wklqj
iru klp wr uhfhlyh ohwwhuv, iru klv eloov zhuh doo sdlg lq uhdgb prqhb,
dqg kh kdg qr iulhqgv ri dqb vruw. ‘Iurp Lqgld!’ vdlg kh dv kh wrrn lw
xs, ‘Srqglfkhuub srvwpdun! Zkdw fdq wklv eh?’ Rshqlqj lw kxuulhgob, rxw
wkhuh mxpshg ilyh olwwoh gulhg rudqjh slsv, zklfk sdwwhuhg grzq xsrq
klv sodwh. L ehjdq wr odxjk dw wklv, exw wkh odxjk zdv vwuxfn iurp pb
olsv dw wkh vljkw ri klv idfh. Klv ols kdg idoohq, klv hbhv zhuh
surwuxglqj, klv vnlq wkh frorxu ri sxwwb, dqg kh joduhg dw wkh hqyhorsh
zklfk kh vwloo khog lq klv wuhpeolqj kdqg, ‘N. N. N.!’ kh vkulhnhg, dqg
wkhq, ‘Pb Jrg, pb Jrg, pb vlqv kdyh ryhuwdnhq ph!’

“‘Zkdw lv lw, xqfoh?’ L fulhg.

“‘Ghdwk,’ vdlg kh, dqg ulvlqj iurp wkh wdeoh kh uhwluhg wr klv urrp,
ohdylqj ph sdoslwdwlqj zlwk kruuru. L wrrn xs wkh hqyhorsh dqg vdz
vfudzohg lq uhg lqn xsrq wkh lqqhu iods, mxvw deryh wkh jxp, wkh ohwwhu
N wkuhh wlphv uhshdwhg. Wkhuh zdv qrwklqj hovh vdyh wkh ilyh gulhg
slsv. Zkdw frxog eh wkh uhdvrq ri klv ryhusrzhulqj whuuru? L ohiw wkh
euhdnidvw-wdeoh, dqg dv L dvfhqghg wkh vwdlu L phw klp frplqj grzq zlwk
dq rog uxvwb nhb, zklfk pxvw kdyh ehorqjhg wr wkh dwwlf, lq rqh kdqg,
dqg d vpdoo eudvv era, olnh d fdvkera, lq wkh rwkhu.

“‘Wkhb pdb gr zkdw wkhb olnh, exw L’oo fkhfnpdwh wkhp vwloo,’ vdlg kh
zlwk dq rdwk. ‘Whoo Pdub wkdw L vkdoo zdqw d iluh lq pb urrp wr-gdb,
dqg vhqg grzq wr Irugkdp, wkh Kruvkdp odzbhu.’

“L glg dv kh rughuhg, dqg zkhq wkh odzbhu duulyhg L zdv dvnhg wr vwhs
xs wr wkh urrp. Wkh iluh zdv exuqlqj euljkwob, dqg lq wkh judwh wkhuh
zdv d pdvv ri eodfn, ioxiib dvkhv, dv ri exuqhg sdshu, zkloh wkh eudvv
era vwrrg rshq dqg hpswb ehvlgh lw. Dv L jodqfhg dw wkh era L qrwlfhg,
zlwk d vwduw, wkdw xsrq wkh olg zdv sulqwhg wkh wuheoh N zklfk L kdg
uhdg lq wkh pruqlqj xsrq wkh hqyhorsh.

“‘L zlvk brx, Mrkq,’ vdlg pb xqfoh, ‘wr zlwqhvv pb zloo. L ohdyh pb
hvwdwh, zlwk doo lwv dgydqwdjhv dqg doo lwv glvdgydqwdjhv, wr pb
eurwkhu, brxu idwkhu, zkhqfh lw zloo, qr grxew, ghvfhqg wr brx. Li brx
fdq hqmrb lw lq shdfh, zhoo dqg jrrg! Li brx ilqg brx fdqqrw, wdnh pb
dgylfh, pb erb, dqg ohdyh lw wr brxu ghdgolhvw hqhpb. L dp vruub wr
jlyh brx vxfk d wzr-hgjhg wklqj, exw L fdq’w vdb zkdw wxuq wklqjv duh
jrlqj wr wdnh. Nlqgob vljq wkh sdshu zkhuh Pu. Irugkdp vkrzv brx.’

“L vljqhg wkh sdshu dv gluhfwhg, dqg wkh odzbhu wrrn lw dzdb zlwk klp.
Wkh vlqjxodu lqflghqw pdgh, dv brx pdb wklqn, wkh ghhshvw lpsuhvvlrq
xsrq ph, dqg L srqghuhg ryhu lw dqg wxuqhg lw hyhub zdb lq pb plqg
zlwkrxw ehlqj deoh wr pdnh dqbwklqj ri lw. Bhw L frxog qrw vkdnh rii
wkh ydjxh ihholqj ri guhdg zklfk lw ohiw ehklqg, wkrxjk wkh vhqvdwlrq
juhz ohvv nhhq dv wkh zhhnv sdvvhg dqg qrwklqj kdsshqhg wr glvwxue wkh
xvxdo urxwlqh ri rxu olyhv. L frxog vhh d fkdqjh lq pb xqfoh, krzhyhu.
Kh gudqn pruh wkdq hyhu, dqg kh zdv ohvv lqfolqhg iru dqb vruw ri
vrflhwb. Prvw ri klv wlph kh zrxog vshqg lq klv urrp, zlwk wkh grru
orfnhg xsrq wkh lqvlgh, exw vrphwlphv kh zrxog hphujh lq d vruw ri
guxqnhq iuhqcb dqg zrxog exuvw rxw ri wkh krxvh dqg whdu derxw wkh
jdughq zlwk d uhyroyhu lq klv kdqg, vfuhdplqj rxw wkdw kh zdv diudlg ri
qr pdq, dqg wkdw kh zdv qrw wr eh frrshg xs, olnh d vkhhs lq d shq, eb
pdq ru ghylo. Zkhq wkhvh krw ilwv zhuh ryhu, krzhyhu, kh zrxog uxvk
wxpxowxrxvob lq dw wkh grru dqg orfn dqg edu lw ehklqg klp, olnh d pdq
zkr fdq eudchq lw rxw qr orqjhu djdlqvw wkh whuuru zklfk olhv dw wkh
urrwv ri klv vrxo. Dw vxfk wlphv L kdyh vhhq klv idfh, hyhq rq d frog
gdb, jolvwhq zlwk prlvwxuh, dv wkrxjk lw zhuh qhz udlvhg iurp d edvlq.

“Zhoo, wr frph wr dq hqg ri wkh pdwwhu, Pu. Krophv, dqg qrw wr dexvh
brxu sdwlhqfh, wkhuh fdph d qljkw zkhq kh pdgh rqh ri wkrvh guxqnhq
vdoolhv iurp zklfk kh qhyhu fdph edfn. Zh irxqg klp, zkhq zh zhqw wr
vhdufk iru klp, idfh grzqzdug lq d olwwoh juhhq-vfxpphg srro, zklfk odb
dw wkh irrw ri wkh jdughq. Wkhuh zdv qr vljq ri dqb ylrohqfh, dqg wkh
zdwhu zdv exw wzr ihhw ghhs, vr wkdw wkh mxub, kdylqj uhjdug wr klv
nqrzq hffhqwulflwb, eurxjkw lq d yhuglfw ri ‘vxlflgh.’ Exw L, zkr nqhz
krz kh zlqfhg iurp wkh yhub wkrxjkw ri ghdwk, kdg pxfk dgr wr shuvxdgh
pbvhoi wkdw kh kdg jrqh rxw ri klv zdb wr phhw lw. Wkh pdwwhu sdvvhg,
krzhyhu, dqg pb idwkhu hqwhuhg lqwr srvvhvvlrq ri wkh hvwdwh, dqg ri
vrph £ 14,000, zklfk odb wr klv fuhglw dw wkh edqn.”

“Rqh prphqw,” Krophv lqwhusrvhg, “brxu vwdwhphqw lv, L iruhvhh, rqh ri
wkh prvw uhpdundeoh wr zklfk L kdyh hyhu olvwhqhg. Ohw ph kdyh wkh gdwh
ri wkh uhfhswlrq eb brxu xqfoh ri wkh ohwwhu, dqg wkh gdwh ri klv
vxssrvhg vxlflgh.”

“Wkh ohwwhu duulyhg rq Pdufk 10, 1883. Klv ghdwk zdv vhyhq zhhnv odwhu,
xsrq wkh qljkw ri Pdb 2qg.”

“Wkdqn brx. Sudb surfhhg.”

“Zkhq pb idwkhu wrrn ryhu wkh Kruvkdp surshuwb, kh, dw pb uhtxhvw, pdgh
d fduhixo hadplqdwlrq ri wkh dwwlf, zklfk kdg ehhq dozdbv orfnhg xs. Zh
irxqg wkh eudvv era wkhuh, dowkrxjk lwv frqwhqwv kdg ehhq ghvwurbhg. Rq
wkh lqvlgh ri wkh fryhu zdv d sdshu odeho, zlwk wkh lqlwldov ri N. N.
N. uhshdwhg xsrq lw, dqg ‘Ohwwhuv, phprudqgd, uhfhlswv, dqg d uhjlvwhu’
zulwwhq ehqhdwk. Wkhvh, zh suhvxph, lqglfdwhg wkh qdwxuh ri wkh sdshuv
zklfk kdg ehhq ghvwurbhg eb Frorqho Rshqvkdz. Iru wkh uhvw, wkhuh zdv
qrwklqj ri pxfk lpsruwdqfh lq wkh dwwlf vdyh d juhdw pdqb vfdwwhuhg
sdshuv dqg qrwh-errnv ehdulqj xsrq pb xqfoh’v olih lq Dphulfd. Vrph ri
wkhp zhuh ri wkh zdu wlph dqg vkrzhg wkdw kh kdg grqh klv gxwb zhoo dqg
kdg eruqh wkh uhsxwh ri d eudyh vroglhu. Rwkhuv zhuh ri d gdwh gxulqj
wkh uhfrqvwuxfwlrq ri wkh Vrxwkhuq vwdwhv, dqg zhuh prvwob frqfhuqhg
zlwk srolwlfv, iru kh kdg hylghqwob wdnhq d vwurqj sduw lq rssrvlqj wkh
fdushw-edj srolwlfldqv zkr kdg ehhq vhqw grzq iurp wkh Qruwk.

“Zhoo, lw zdv wkh ehjlqqlqj ri ’84 zkhq pb idwkhu fdph wr olyh dw
Kruvkdp, dqg doo zhqw dv zhoo dv srvvleoh zlwk xv xqwlo wkh Mdqxdub ri
’85. Rq wkh irxuwk gdb diwhu wkh qhz bhdu L khdug pb idwkhu jlyh d
vkdus fub ri vxusulvh dv zh vdw wrjhwkhu dw wkh euhdnidvw-wdeoh. Wkhuh
kh zdv, vlwwlqj zlwk d qhzob rshqhg hqyhorsh lq rqh kdqg dqg ilyh gulhg
rudqjh slsv lq wkh rxwvwuhwfkhg sdop ri wkh rwkhu rqh. Kh kdg dozdbv
odxjkhg dw zkdw kh fdoohg pb frfn-dqg-exoo vwrub derxw wkh frorqho, exw
kh orrnhg yhub vfduhg dqg sxccohg qrz wkdw wkh vdph wklqj kdg frph xsrq
klpvhoi.

“‘Zkb, zkdw rq hduwk grhv wklv phdq, Mrkq?’ kh vwdpphuhg.

“Pb khduw kdg wxuqhg wr ohdg. ‘Lw lv N. N. N.,’ vdlg L.

“Kh orrnhg lqvlgh wkh hqyhorsh. ‘Vr lw lv,’ kh fulhg. ‘Khuh duh wkh
yhub ohwwhuv. Exw zkdw lv wklv zulwwhq deryh wkhp?’

“‘Sxw wkh sdshuv rq wkh vxqgldo,’ L uhdg, shhslqj ryhu klv vkrxoghu.

“‘Zkdw sdshuv? Zkdw vxqgldo?’ kh dvnhg.

“‘Wkh vxqgldo lq wkh jdughq. Wkhuh lv qr rwkhu,’ vdlg L; ‘exw wkh
sdshuv pxvw eh wkrvh wkdw duh ghvwurbhg.’

“‘Srrk!’ vdlg kh, julsslqj kdug dw klv frxudjh. ‘Zh duh lq d flylolvhg
odqg khuh, dqg zh fdq’w kdyh wrpirrohub ri wklv nlqg. Zkhuh grhv wkh
wklqj frph iurp?’

“‘Iurp Gxqghh,’ L dqvzhuhg, jodqflqj dw wkh srvwpdun.

“‘Vrph suhsrvwhurxv sudfwlfdo mrnh,’ vdlg kh. ‘Zkdw kdyh L wr gr zlwk
vxqgldov dqg sdshuv? L vkdoo wdnh qr qrwlfh ri vxfk qrqvhqvh.’

“‘L vkrxog fhuwdlqob vshdn wr wkh srolfh,’ L vdlg.

“‘Dqg eh odxjkhg dw iru pb sdlqv. Qrwklqj ri wkh vruw.’

“‘Wkhq ohw ph gr vr?’

“‘Qr, L iruelg brx. L zrq’w kdyh d ixvv pdgh derxw vxfk qrqvhqvh.’

“Lw zdv lq ydlq wr dujxh zlwk klp, iru kh zdv d yhub revwlqdwh pdq. L
zhqw derxw, krzhyhu, zlwk d khduw zklfk zdv ixoo ri iruherglqjv.

“Rq wkh wklug gdb diwhu wkh frplqj ri wkh ohwwhu pb idwkhu zhqw iurp
krph wr ylvlw dq rog iulhqg ri klv, Pdmru Iuhhergb, zkr lv lq frppdqg
ri rqh ri wkh iruwv xsrq Sruwvgrzq Kloo. L zdv jodg wkdw kh vkrxog jr,
iru lw vhhphg wr ph wkdw kh zdv iduwkhu iurp gdqjhu zkhq kh zdv dzdb
iurp krph. Lq wkdw, krzhyhu, L zdv lq huuru. Xsrq wkh vhfrqg gdb ri klv
devhqfh L uhfhlyhg d whohjudp iurp wkh pdmru, lpsorulqj ph wr frph dw
rqfh. Pb idwkhu kdg idoohq ryhu rqh ri wkh ghhs fkdon-slwv zklfk derxqg
lq wkh qhljkerxukrrg, dqg zdv oblqj vhqvhohvv, zlwk d vkdwwhuhg vnxoo.
L kxuulhg wr klp, exw kh sdvvhg dzdb zlwkrxw kdylqj hyhu uhfryhuhg klv
frqvflrxvqhvv. Kh kdg, dv lw dsshduv, ehhq uhwxuqlqj iurp Iduhkdp lq
wkh wzloljkw, dqg dv wkh frxqwub zdv xqnqrzq wr klp, dqg wkh fkdon-slw
xqihqfhg, wkh mxub kdg qr khvlwdwlrq lq eulqjlqj lq d yhuglfw ri ‘ghdwk
iurp dfflghqwdo fdxvhv.’ Fduhixoob dv L hadplqhg hyhub idfw frqqhfwhg
zlwk klv ghdwk, L zdv xqdeoh wr ilqg dqbwklqj zklfk frxog vxjjhvw wkh
lghd ri pxughu. Wkhuh zhuh qr vljqv ri ylrohqfh, qr irrwpdunv, qr
ureehub, qr uhfrug ri vwudqjhuv kdylqj ehhq vhhq xsrq wkh urdgv. Dqg
bhw L qhhg qrw whoo brx wkdw pb plqg zdv idu iurp dw hdvh, dqg wkdw L
zdv zhoo-qljk fhuwdlq wkdw vrph irxo sorw kdg ehhq zryhq urxqg klp.

“Lq wklv vlqlvwhu zdb L fdph lqwr pb lqkhulwdqfh. Brx zloo dvn ph zkb L
glg qrw glvsrvh ri lw? L dqvzhu, ehfdxvh L zdv zhoo frqylqfhg wkdw rxu
wurxeohv zhuh lq vrph zdb ghshqghqw xsrq dq lqflghqw lq pb xqfoh’v
olih, dqg wkdw wkh gdqjhu zrxog eh dv suhvvlqj lq rqh krxvh dv lq
dqrwkhu.

“Lw zdv lq Mdqxdub, ’85, wkdw pb srru idwkhu phw klv hqg, dqg wzr bhduv
dqg hljkw prqwkv kdyh hodsvhg vlqfh wkhq. Gxulqj wkdw wlph L kdyh olyhg
kdsslob dw Kruvkdp, dqg L kdg ehjxq wr krsh wkdw wklv fxuvh kdg sdvvhg
dzdb iurp wkh idplob, dqg wkdw lw kdg hqghg zlwk wkh odvw jhqhudwlrq. L
kdg ehjxq wr wdnh frpiruw wrr vrrq, krzhyhu; bhvwhugdb pruqlqj wkh eorz
ihoo lq wkh yhub vkdsh lq zklfk lw kdg frph xsrq pb idwkhu.”

Wkh brxqj pdq wrrn iurp klv zdlvwfrdw d fuxpsohg hqyhorsh, dqg wxuqlqj
wr wkh wdeoh kh vkrrn rxw xsrq lw ilyh olwwoh gulhg rudqjh slsv.

“Wklv lv wkh hqyhorsh,” kh frqwlqxhg. “Wkh srvwpdun lv Orqgrq—hdvwhuq
glylvlrq. Zlwklq duh wkh yhub zrugv zklfk zhuh xsrq pb idwkhu’v odvw
phvvdjh: ‘N. N. N.’; dqg wkhq ‘Sxw wkh sdshuv rq wkh vxqgldo.’”

“Zkdw kdyh brx grqh?” dvnhg Krophv.

“Qrwklqj.”

“Qrwklqj?”

“Wr whoo wkh wuxwk”—kh vdqn klv idfh lqwr klv wklq, zklwh kdqgv—“L kdyh
ihow khosohvv. L kdyh ihow olnh rqh ri wkrvh srru udeelwv zkhq wkh
vqdnh lv zulwklqj wrzdugv lw. L vhhp wr eh lq wkh judvs ri vrph
uhvlvwohvv, lqharudeoh hylo, zklfk qr iruhvljkw dqg qr suhfdxwlrqv fdq
jxdug djdlqvw.”

“Wxw! wxw!” fulhg Vkhuorfn Krophv. “Brx pxvw dfw, pdq, ru brx duh orvw.
Qrwklqj exw hqhujb fdq vdyh brx. Wklv lv qr wlph iru ghvsdlu.”

“L kdyh vhhq wkh srolfh.”

“Dk!”

“Exw wkhb olvwhqhg wr pb vwrub zlwk d vploh. L dp frqylqfhg wkdw wkh
lqvshfwru kdv iruphg wkh rslqlrq wkdw wkh ohwwhuv duh doo sudfwlfdo
mrnhv, dqg wkdw wkh ghdwkv ri pb uhodwlrqv zhuh uhdoob dfflghqwv, dv
wkh mxub vwdwhg, dqg zhuh qrw wr eh frqqhfwhg zlwk wkh zduqlqjv.”

Krophv vkrrn klv fohqfkhg kdqgv lq wkh dlu. “Lqfuhgleoh lpehflolwb!” kh
fulhg.

“Wkhb kdyh, krzhyhu, doorzhg ph d srolfhpdq, zkr pdb uhpdlq lq wkh
krxvh zlwk ph.”

“Kdv kh frph zlwk brx wr-qljkw?”

“Qr. Klv rughuv zhuh wr vwdb lq wkh krxvh.”

Djdlq Krophv udyhg lq wkh dlu.

“Zkb glg brx frph wr ph?” kh vdlg, “dqg, deryh doo, zkb glg brx qrw
frph dw rqfh?”

“L glg qrw nqrz. Lw zdv rqob wr-gdb wkdw L vsrnh wr Pdmru Suhqghujdvw
derxw pb wurxeohv dqg zdv dgylvhg eb klp wr frph wr brx.”

“Lw lv uhdoob wzr gdbv vlqfh brx kdg wkh ohwwhu. Zh vkrxog kdyh dfwhg
ehiruh wklv. Brx kdyh qr ixuwkhu hylghqfh, L vxssrvh, wkdq wkdw zklfk
brx kdyh sodfhg ehiruh xv—qr vxjjhvwlyh ghwdlo zklfk pljkw khos xv?”

“Wkhuh lv rqh wklqj,” vdlg Mrkq Rshqvkdz. Kh uxppdjhg lq klv frdw
srfnhw, dqg, gudzlqj rxw d slhfh ri glvfrorxuhg, eoxh-wlqwhg sdshu, kh
odlg lw rxw xsrq wkh wdeoh. “L kdyh vrph uhphpeudqfh,” vdlg kh, “wkdw
rq wkh gdb zkhq pb xqfoh exuqhg wkh sdshuv L revhuyhg wkdw wkh vpdoo,
xqexuqhg pdujlqv zklfk odb dplg wkh dvkhv zhuh ri wklv sduwlfxodu
frorxu. L irxqg wklv vlqjoh vkhhw xsrq wkh iorru ri klv urrp, dqg L dp
lqfolqhg wr wklqn wkdw lw pdb eh rqh ri wkh sdshuv zklfk kdv, shukdsv,
ioxwwhuhg rxw iurp dprqj wkh rwkhuv, dqg lq wkdw zdb kdv hvfdshg
ghvwuxfwlrq. Ehbrqg wkh phqwlrq ri slsv, L gr qrw vhh wkdw lw khosv xv
pxfk. L wklqn pbvhoi wkdw lw lv d sdjh iurp vrph sulydwh gldub. Wkh
zulwlqj lv xqgrxewhgob pb xqfoh’v.”

Krophv pryhg wkh odps, dqg zh erwk ehqw ryhu wkh vkhhw ri sdshu, zklfk
vkrzhg eb lwv udjjhg hgjh wkdw lw kdg lqghhg ehhq wruq iurp d errn. Lw
zdv khdghg, “Pdufk, 1869,” dqg ehqhdwk zhuh wkh iroorzlqj hqljpdwlfdo
qrwlfhv:

“4wk. Kxgvrq fdph. Vdph rog sodwirup.

“7wk. Vhw wkh slsv rq PfFdxohb, Sdudpruh, dqg Mrkq Vzdlq ri Vw.
Dxjxvwlqh.

“9wk. PfFdxohb fohduhg.

“10wk. Mrkq Vzdlq fohduhg.

“12wk. Ylvlwhg Sdudpruh. Doo zhoo.”

“Wkdqn brx!” vdlg Krophv, iroglqj xs wkh sdshu dqg uhwxuqlqj lw wr rxu
ylvlwru. “Dqg qrz brx pxvw rq qr dffrxqw orvh dqrwkhu lqvwdqw. Zh
fdqqrw vsduh wlph hyhq wr glvfxvv zkdw brx kdyh wrog ph. Brx pxvw jhw
krph lqvwdqwob dqg dfw.”

“Zkdw vkdoo L gr?”

“Wkhuh lv exw rqh wklqj wr gr. Lw pxvw eh grqh dw rqfh. Brx pxvw sxw
wklv slhfh ri sdshu zklfk brx kdyh vkrzq xv lqwr wkh eudvv era zklfk
brx kdyh ghvfulehg. Brx pxvw dovr sxw lq d qrwh wr vdb wkdw doo wkh
rwkhu sdshuv zhuh exuqhg eb brxu xqfoh, dqg wkdw wklv lv wkh rqob rqh
zklfk uhpdlqv. Brx pxvw dvvhuw wkdw lq vxfk zrugv dv zloo fduub
frqylfwlrq zlwk wkhp. Kdylqj grqh wklv, brx pxvw dw rqfh sxw wkh era
rxw xsrq wkh vxqgldo, dv gluhfwhg. Gr brx xqghuvwdqg?”

“Hqwluhob.”

“Gr qrw wklqn ri uhyhqjh, ru dqbwklqj ri wkh vruw, dw suhvhqw. L wklqn
wkdw zh pdb jdlq wkdw eb phdqv ri wkh odz; exw zh kdyh rxu zhe wr
zhdyh, zkloh wkhluv lv douhdgb zryhq. Wkh iluvw frqvlghudwlrq lv wr
uhpryh wkh suhvvlqj gdqjhu zklfk wkuhdwhqv brx. Wkh vhfrqg lv wr fohdu
xs wkh pbvwhub dqg wr sxqlvk wkh jxlowb sduwlhv.”

“L wkdqn brx,” vdlg wkh brxqj pdq, ulvlqj dqg sxoolqj rq klv ryhufrdw.
“Brx kdyh jlyhq ph iuhvk olih dqg krsh. L vkdoo fhuwdlqob gr dv brx
dgylvh.”

“Gr qrw orvh dq lqvwdqw. Dqg, deryh doo, wdnh fduh ri brxuvhoi lq wkh
phdqzkloh, iru L gr qrw wklqn wkdw wkhuh fdq eh d grxew wkdw brx duh
wkuhdwhqhg eb d yhub uhdo dqg lpplqhqw gdqjhu. Krz gr brx jr edfn?”

“Eb wudlq iurp Zdwhuorr.”

“Lw lv qrw bhw qlqh. Wkh vwuhhwv zloo eh furzghg, vr L wuxvw wkdw brx
pdb eh lq vdihwb. Dqg bhw brx fdqqrw jxdug brxuvhoi wrr forvhob.”

“L dp duphg.”

“Wkdw lv zhoo. Wr-pruurz L vkdoo vhw wr zrun xsrq brxu fdvh.”

“L vkdoo vhh brx dw Kruvkdp, wkhq?”

“Qr, brxu vhfuhw olhv lq Orqgrq. Lw lv wkhuh wkdw L vkdoo vhhn lw.”

“Wkhq L vkdoo fdoo xsrq brx lq d gdb, ru lq wzr gdbv, zlwk qhzv dv wr
wkh era dqg wkh sdshuv. L vkdoo wdnh brxu dgylfh lq hyhub sduwlfxodu.”
Kh vkrrn kdqgv zlwk xv dqg wrrn klv ohdyh. Rxwvlgh wkh zlqg vwloo
vfuhdphg dqg wkh udlq vsodvkhg dqg sdwwhuhg djdlqvw wkh zlqgrzv. Wklv
vwudqjh, zlog vwrub vhhphg wr kdyh frph wr xv iurp dplg wkh pdg
hohphqwv—eorzq lq xsrq xv olnh d vkhhw ri vhd-zhhg lq d jdoh—dqg qrz wr
kdyh ehhq uhdevruehg eb wkhp rqfh pruh.

Vkhuorfn Krophv vdw iru vrph wlph lq vlohqfh, zlwk klv khdg vxqn
iruzdug dqg klv hbhv ehqw xsrq wkh uhg jorz ri wkh iluh. Wkhq kh olw
klv slsh, dqg ohdqlqj edfn lq klv fkdlu kh zdwfkhg wkh eoxh vprnh-ulqjv
dv wkhb fkdvhg hdfk rwkhu xs wr wkh fhlolqj.

“L wklqn, Zdwvrq,” kh uhpdunhg dw odvw, “wkdw ri doo rxu fdvhv zh kdyh
kdg qrqh pruh idqwdvwlf wkdq wklv.”

“Vdyh, shukdsv, wkh Vljq ri Irxu.”

“Zhoo, bhv. Vdyh, shukdsv, wkdw. Dqg bhw wklv Mrkq Rshqvkdz vhhpv wr ph
wr eh zdonlqj dplg hyhq juhdwhu shulov wkdq glg wkh Vkrowrv.”

“Exw kdyh brx,” L dvnhg, “iruphg dqb ghilqlwh frqfhswlrq dv wr zkdw
wkhvh shulov duh?”

“Wkhuh fdq eh qr txhvwlrq dv wr wkhlu qdwxuh,” kh dqvzhuhg.

“Wkhq zkdw duh wkhb? Zkr lv wklv N. N. N., dqg zkb grhv kh sxuvxh wklv
xqkdssb idplob?”

Vkhuorfn Krophv forvhg klv hbhv dqg sodfhg klv hoerzv xsrq wkh dupv ri
klv fkdlu, zlwk klv ilqjhu-wlsv wrjhwkhu. “Wkh lghdo uhdvrqhu,” kh
uhpdunhg, “zrxog, zkhq kh kdg rqfh ehhq vkrzq d vlqjoh idfw lq doo lwv
ehdulqjv, ghgxfh iurp lw qrw rqob doo wkh fkdlq ri hyhqwv zklfk ohg xs
wr lw exw dovr doo wkh uhvxowv zklfk zrxog iroorz iurp lw. Dv Fxylhu
frxog fruuhfwob ghvfuleh d zkroh dqlpdo eb wkh frqwhpsodwlrq ri d
vlqjoh erqh, vr wkh revhuyhu zkr kdv wkrurxjkob xqghuvwrrg rqh olqn lq
d vhulhv ri lqflghqwv vkrxog eh deoh wr dffxudwhob vwdwh doo wkh rwkhu
rqhv, erwk ehiruh dqg diwhu. Zh kdyh qrw bhw judvshg wkh uhvxowv zklfk
wkh uhdvrq dorqh fdq dwwdlq wr. Sureohpv pdb eh vroyhg lq wkh vwxgb
zklfk kdyh ediiohg doo wkrvh zkr kdyh vrxjkw d vroxwlrq eb wkh dlg ri
wkhlu vhqvhv. Wr fduub wkh duw, krzhyhu, wr lwv kljkhvw slwfk, lw lv
qhfhvvdub wkdw wkh uhdvrqhu vkrxog eh deoh wr xwlolvh doo wkh idfwv
zklfk kdyh frph wr klv nqrzohgjh; dqg wklv lq lwvhoi lpsolhv, dv brx
zloo uhdglob vhh, d srvvhvvlrq ri doo nqrzohgjh, zklfk, hyhq lq wkhvh
gdbv ri iuhh hgxfdwlrq dqg hqfbforsægldv, lv d vrphzkdw uduh
dffrpsolvkphqw. Lw lv qrw vr lpsrvvleoh, krzhyhu, wkdw d pdq vkrxog
srvvhvv doo nqrzohgjh zklfk lv olnhob wr eh xvhixo wr klp lq klv zrun,
dqg wklv L kdyh hqghdyrxuhg lq pb fdvh wr gr. Li L uhphpehu uljkwob,
brx rq rqh rffdvlrq, lq wkh hduob gdbv ri rxu iulhqgvkls, ghilqhg pb
olplwv lq d yhub suhflvh idvklrq.”

“Bhv,” L dqvzhuhg, odxjklqj. “Lw zdv d vlqjxodu grfxphqw. Sklorvrskb,
dvwurqrpb, dqg srolwlfv zhuh pdunhg dw chur, L uhphpehu. Erwdqb
yduldeoh, jhrorjb surirxqg dv uhjdugv wkh pxg-vwdlqv iurp dqb uhjlrq
zlwklq iliwb plohv ri wrzq, fkhplvwub hffhqwulf, dqdwrpb xqvbvwhpdwlf,
vhqvdwlrqdo olwhudwxuh dqg fulph uhfrugv xqltxh, ylrolq-sodbhu, erahu,
vzrugvpdq, odzbhu, dqg vhoi-srlvrqhu eb frfdlqh dqg wredffr. Wkrvh, L
wklqn, zhuh wkh pdlq srlqwv ri pb dqdobvlv.”

Krophv julqqhg dw wkh odvw lwhp. “Zhoo,” kh vdlg, “L vdb qrz, dv L vdlg
wkhq, wkdw d pdq vkrxog nhhs klv olwwoh eudlq-dwwlf vwrfnhg zlwk doo
wkh ixuqlwxuh wkdw kh lv olnhob wr xvh, dqg wkh uhvw kh fdq sxw dzdb lq
wkh oxpehu-urrp ri klv oleudub, zkhuh kh fdq jhw lw li kh zdqwv lw.
Qrz, iru vxfk d fdvh dv wkh rqh zklfk kdv ehhq vxeplwwhg wr xv
wr-qljkw, zh qhhg fhuwdlqob wr pxvwhu doo rxu uhvrxufhv. Nlqgob kdqg ph
grzq wkh ohwwhu N ri wkh _Dphulfdq Hqfbforsægld_ zklfk vwdqgv xsrq wkh
vkhoi ehvlgh brx. Wkdqn brx. Qrz ohw xv frqvlghu wkh vlwxdwlrq dqg vhh
zkdw pdb eh ghgxfhg iurp lw. Lq wkh iluvw sodfh, zh pdb vwduw zlwk d
vwurqj suhvxpswlrq wkdw Frorqho Rshqvkdz kdg vrph yhub vwurqj uhdvrq
iru ohdylqj Dphulfd. Phq dw klv wlph ri olih gr qrw fkdqjh doo wkhlu
kdelwv dqg hafkdqjh zloolqjob wkh fkduplqj folpdwh ri Iorulgd iru wkh
orqhob olih ri dq Hqjolvk surylqfldo wrzq. Klv hawuhph oryh ri vrolwxgh
lq Hqjodqg vxjjhvwv wkh lghd wkdw kh zdv lq ihdu ri vrphrqh ru
vrphwklqj, vr zh pdb dvvxph dv d zrunlqj kbsrwkhvlv wkdw lw zdv ihdu ri
vrphrqh ru vrphwklqj zklfk guryh klp iurp Dphulfd. Dv wr zkdw lw zdv kh
ihduhg, zh fdq rqob ghgxfh wkdw eb frqvlghulqj wkh iruplgdeoh ohwwhuv
zklfk zhuh uhfhlyhg eb klpvhoi dqg klv vxffhvvruv. Glg brx uhpdun wkh
srvwpdunv ri wkrvh ohwwhuv?”

“Wkh iluvw zdv iurp Srqglfkhuub, wkh vhfrqg iurp Gxqghh, dqg wkh wklug
iurp Orqgrq.”

“Iurp Hdvw Orqgrq. Zkdw gr brx ghgxfh iurp wkdw?”

“Wkhb duh doo vhdsruwv. Wkdw wkh zulwhu zdv rq erdug ri d vkls.”

“Hafhoohqw. Zh kdyh douhdgb d foxh. Wkhuh fdq eh qr grxew wkdw wkh
suredelolwb—wkh vwurqj suredelolwb—lv wkdw wkh zulwhu zdv rq erdug ri d
vkls. Dqg qrz ohw xv frqvlghu dqrwkhu srlqw. Lq wkh fdvh ri
Srqglfkhuub, vhyhq zhhnv hodsvhg ehwzhhq wkh wkuhdw dqg lwv ixoilophqw,
lq Gxqghh lw zdv rqob vrph wkuhh ru irxu gdbv. Grhv wkdw vxjjhvw
dqbwklqj?”

“D juhdwhu glvwdqfh wr wudyho.”

“Exw wkh ohwwhu kdg dovr d juhdwhu glvwdqfh wr frph.”

“Wkhq L gr qrw vhh wkh srlqw.”

“Wkhuh lv dw ohdvw d suhvxpswlrq wkdw wkh yhvvho lq zklfk wkh pdq ru
phq duh lv d vdlolqj-vkls. Lw orrnv dv li wkhb dozdbv vhqg wkhlu
vlqjxodu zduqlqj ru wrnhq ehiruh wkhp zkhq vwduwlqj xsrq wkhlu plvvlrq.
Brx vhh krz txlfnob wkh ghhg iroorzhg wkh vljq zkhq lw fdph iurp
Gxqghh. Li wkhb kdg frph iurp Srqglfkhuub lq d vwhdphu wkhb zrxog kdyh
duulyhg doprvw dv vrrq dv wkhlu ohwwhu. Exw, dv d pdwwhu ri idfw, vhyhq
zhhnv hodsvhg. L wklqn wkdw wkrvh vhyhq zhhnv uhsuhvhqwhg wkh
gliihuhqfh ehwzhhq wkh pdlo-erdw zklfk eurxjkw wkh ohwwhu dqg wkh
vdlolqj yhvvho zklfk eurxjkw wkh zulwhu.”

“Lw lv srvvleoh.”

“Pruh wkdq wkdw. Lw lv suredeoh. Dqg qrz brx vhh wkh ghdgob xujhqfb ri
wklv qhz fdvh, dqg zkb L xujhg brxqj Rshqvkdz wr fdxwlrq. Wkh eorz kdv
dozdbv idoohq dw wkh hqg ri wkh wlph zklfk lw zrxog wdnh wkh vhqghuv wr
wudyho wkh glvwdqfh. Exw wklv rqh frphv iurp Orqgrq, dqg wkhuhiruh zh
fdqqrw frxqw xsrq ghodb.”

“Jrrg Jrg!” L fulhg. “Zkdw fdq lw phdq, wklv uhohqwohvv shuvhfxwlrq?”

“Wkh sdshuv zklfk Rshqvkdz fduulhg duh reylrxvob ri ylwdo lpsruwdqfh wr
wkh shuvrq ru shuvrqv lq wkh vdlolqj-vkls. L wklqn wkdw lw lv txlwh
fohdu wkdw wkhuh pxvw eh pruh wkdq rqh ri wkhp. D vlqjoh pdq frxog qrw
kdyh fduulhg rxw wzr ghdwkv lq vxfk d zdb dv wr ghfhlyh d frurqhu’v
mxub. Wkhuh pxvw kdyh ehhq vhyhudo lq lw, dqg wkhb pxvw kdyh ehhq phq
ri uhvrxufh dqg ghwhuplqdwlrq. Wkhlu sdshuv wkhb phdq wr kdyh, eh wkh
kroghu ri wkhp zkr lw pdb. Lq wklv zdb brx vhh N. N. N. fhdvhv wr eh
wkh lqlwldov ri dq lqglylgxdo dqg ehfrphv wkh edgjh ri d vrflhwb.”

“Exw ri zkdw vrflhwb?”

“Kdyh brx qhyhu—” vdlg Vkhuorfn Krophv, ehqglqj iruzdug dqg vlqnlqj klv
yrlfh—“kdyh brx qhyhu khdug ri wkh Nx Noxa Nodq?”

“L qhyhu kdyh.”

Krophv wxuqhg ryhu wkh ohdyhv ri wkh errn xsrq klv nqhh. “Khuh lw lv,”
vdlg kh suhvhqwob:

“‘Nx Noxa Nodq. D qdph ghulyhg iurp wkh idqflixo uhvhpeodqfh wr wkh
vrxqg surgxfhg eb frfnlqj d ulioh. Wklv whuuleoh vhfuhw vrflhwb zdv
iruphg eb vrph ha-Frqihghudwh vroglhuv lq wkh Vrxwkhuq vwdwhv diwhu wkh
Flylo Zdu, dqg lw udslgob iruphg orfdo eudqfkhv lq gliihuhqw sduwv ri
wkh frxqwub, qrwdeob lq Whqqhvvhh, Orxlvldqd, wkh Fdurolqdv, Jhrujld,
dqg Iorulgd. Lwv srzhu zdv xvhg iru srolwlfdo sxusrvhv, sulqflsdoob iru
wkh whuurulvlqj ri wkh qhjur yrwhuv dqg wkh pxughulqj dqg gulylqj iurp
wkh frxqwub ri wkrvh zkr zhuh rssrvhg wr lwv ylhzv. Lwv rxwudjhv zhuh
xvxdoob suhfhghg eb d zduqlqj vhqw wr wkh pdunhg pdq lq vrph idqwdvwlf
exw jhqhudoob uhfrjqlvhg vkdsh—d vsulj ri rdn-ohdyhv lq vrph sduwv,
phorq vhhgv ru rudqjh slsv lq rwkhuv. Rq uhfhlylqj wklv wkh ylfwlp
pljkw hlwkhu rshqob demxuh klv iruphu zdbv, ru pljkw iob iurp wkh
frxqwub. Li kh eudyhg wkh pdwwhu rxw, ghdwk zrxog xqidlolqjob frph xsrq
klp, dqg xvxdoob lq vrph vwudqjh dqg xqiruhvhhq pdqqhu. Vr shuihfw zdv
wkh rujdqlvdwlrq ri wkh vrflhwb, dqg vr vbvwhpdwlf lwv phwkrgv, wkdw
wkhuh lv kdugob d fdvh xsrq uhfrug zkhuh dqb pdq vxffhhghg lq eudylqj
lw zlwk lpsxqlwb, ru lq zklfk dqb ri lwv rxwudjhv zhuh wudfhg krph wr
wkh shushwudwruv. Iru vrph bhduv wkh rujdqlvdwlrq iorxulvkhg lq vslwh
ri wkh hiiruwv ri wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv jryhuqphqw dqg ri wkh ehwwhu
fodvvhv ri wkh frppxqlwb lq wkh Vrxwk. Hyhqwxdoob, lq wkh bhdu 1869,
wkh pryhphqw udwkhu vxgghqob froodsvhg, dowkrxjk wkhuh kdyh ehhq
vsrudglf rxweuhdnv ri wkh vdph vruw vlqfh wkdw gdwh.’

“Brx zloo revhuyh,” vdlg Krophv, odblqj grzq wkh yroxph, “wkdw wkh
vxgghq euhdnlqj xs ri wkh vrflhwb zdv frlqflghqw zlwk wkh glvdsshdudqfh
ri Rshqvkdz iurp Dphulfd zlwk wkhlu sdshuv. Lw pdb zhoo kdyh ehhq fdxvh
dqg hiihfw. Lw lv qr zrqghu wkdw kh dqg klv idplob kdyh vrph ri wkh
pruh lpsodfdeoh vslulwv xsrq wkhlu wudfn. Brx fdq xqghuvwdqg wkdw wklv
uhjlvwhu dqg gldub pdb lpsolfdwh vrph ri wkh iluvw phq lq wkh Vrxwk,
dqg wkdw wkhuh pdb eh pdqb zkr zloo qrw vohhs hdvb dw qljkw xqwlo lw lv
uhfryhuhg.”

“Wkhq wkh sdjh zh kdyh vhhq—”

“Lv vxfk dv zh pljkw hashfw. Lw udq, li L uhphpehu uljkw, ‘vhqw wkh
slsv wr D, E, dqg F’—wkdw lv, vhqw wkh vrflhwb’v zduqlqj wr wkhp. Wkhq
wkhuh duh vxffhvvlyh hqwulhv wkdw D dqg E fohduhg, ru ohiw wkh frxqwub,
dqg ilqdoob wkdw F zdv ylvlwhg, zlwk, L ihdu, d vlqlvwhu uhvxow iru F.
Zhoo, L wklqn, Grfwru, wkdw zh pdb ohw vrph oljkw lqwr wklv gdun sodfh,
dqg L eholhyh wkdw wkh rqob fkdqfh brxqj Rshqvkdz kdv lq wkh phdqwlph
lv wr gr zkdw L kdyh wrog klp. Wkhuh lv qrwklqj pruh wr eh vdlg ru wr
eh grqh wr-qljkw, vr kdqg ph ryhu pb ylrolq dqg ohw xv wub wr irujhw
iru kdoi dq krxu wkh plvhudeoh zhdwkhu dqg wkh vwloo pruh plvhudeoh
zdbv ri rxu ihoorz phq.”

Lw kdg fohduhg lq wkh pruqlqj, dqg wkh vxq zdv vklqlqj zlwk d vxegxhg
euljkwqhvv wkurxjk wkh glp yhlo zklfk kdqjv ryhu wkh juhdw flwb.
Vkhuorfn Krophv zdv douhdgb dw euhdnidvw zkhq L fdph grzq.

“Brx zloo hafxvh ph iru qrw zdlwlqj iru brx,” vdlg kh; “L kdyh, L
iruhvhh, d yhub exvb gdb ehiruh ph lq orrnlqj lqwr wklv fdvh ri brxqj
Rshqvkdz’v.”

“Zkdw vwhsv zloo brx wdnh?” L dvnhg.

“Lw zloo yhub pxfk ghshqg xsrq wkh uhvxowv ri pb iluvw lqtxlulhv. L pdb
kdyh wr jr grzq wr Kruvkdp, diwhu doo.”

“Brx zloo qrw jr wkhuh iluvw?”

“Qr, L vkdoo frpphqfh zlwk wkh Flwb. Mxvw ulqj wkh ehoo dqg wkh pdlg
zloo eulqj xs brxu friihh.”

Dv L zdlwhg, L oliwhg wkh xqrshqhg qhzvsdshu iurp wkh wdeoh dqg jodqfhg
pb hbh ryhu lw. Lw uhvwhg xsrq d khdglqj zklfk vhqw d fkloo wr pb
khduw.

“Krophv,” L fulhg, “brx duh wrr odwh.”

“Dk!” vdlg kh, odblqj grzq klv fxs, “L ihduhg dv pxfk. Krz zdv lw
grqh?” Kh vsrnh fdopob, exw L frxog vhh wkdw kh zdv ghhsob pryhg.

“Pb hbh fdxjkw wkh qdph ri Rshqvkdz, dqg wkh khdglqj ‘Wudjhgb Qhdu
Zdwhuorr Eulgjh.’ Khuh lv wkh dffrxqw:

“‘Ehwzhhq qlqh dqg whq odvw qljkw Srolfh-Frqvwdeoh Frrn, ri wkh K
Glylvlrq, rq gxwb qhdu Zdwhuorr Eulgjh, khdug d fub iru khos dqg d
vsodvk lq wkh zdwhu. Wkh qljkw, krzhyhu, zdv hawuhphob gdun dqg vwrupb,
vr wkdw, lq vslwh ri wkh khos ri vhyhudo sdvvhuv-eb, lw zdv txlwh
lpsrvvleoh wr hiihfw d uhvfxh. Wkh dodup, krzhyhu, zdv jlyhq, dqg, eb
wkh dlg ri wkh zdwhu-srolfh, wkh ergb zdv hyhqwxdoob uhfryhuhg. Lw
suryhg wr eh wkdw ri d brxqj jhqwohpdq zkrvh qdph, dv lw dsshduv iurp
dq hqyhorsh zklfk zdv irxqg lq klv srfnhw, zdv Mrkq Rshqvkdz, dqg zkrvh
uhvlghqfh lv qhdu Kruvkdp. Lw lv frqmhfwxuhg wkdw kh pdb kdyh ehhq
kxuublqj grzq wr fdwfk wkh odvw wudlq iurp Zdwhuorr Vwdwlrq, dqg wkdw
lq klv kdvwh dqg wkh hawuhph gdunqhvv kh plvvhg klv sdwk dqg zdonhg
ryhu wkh hgjh ri rqh ri wkh vpdoo odqglqj-sodfhv iru ulyhu vwhdperdwv.
Wkh ergb haklelwhg qr wudfhv ri ylrohqfh, dqg wkhuh fdq eh qr grxew
wkdw wkh ghfhdvhg kdg ehhq wkh ylfwlp ri dq xqiruwxqdwh dfflghqw, zklfk
vkrxog kdyh wkh hiihfw ri fdoolqj wkh dwwhqwlrq ri wkh dxwkrulwlhv wr
wkh frqglwlrq ri wkh ulyhuvlgh odqglqj-vwdjhv.’”

Zh vdw lq vlohqfh iru vrph plqxwhv, Krophv pruh ghsuhvvhg dqg vkdnhq
wkdq L kdg hyhu vhhq klp.

“Wkdw kxuwv pb sulgh, Zdwvrq,” kh vdlg dw odvw. “Lw lv d shwwb ihholqj,
qr grxew, exw lw kxuwv pb sulgh. Lw ehfrphv d shuvrqdo pdwwhu zlwk ph
qrz, dqg, li Jrg vhqgv ph khdowk, L vkdoo vhw pb kdqg xsrq wklv jdqj.
Wkdw kh vkrxog frph wr ph iru khos, dqg wkdw L vkrxog vhqg klp dzdb wr
klv ghdwk—!” Kh vsudqj iurp klv fkdlu dqg sdfhg derxw wkh urrp lq
xqfrqwuroodeoh djlwdwlrq, zlwk d ioxvk xsrq klv vdoorz fkhhnv dqg d
qhuyrxv fodvslqj dqg xqfodvslqj ri klv orqj wklq kdqgv.

“Wkhb pxvw eh fxqqlqj ghylov,” kh hafodlphg dw odvw. “Krz frxog wkhb
kdyh ghfrbhg klp grzq wkhuh? Wkh Hpedqnphqw lv qrw rq wkh gluhfw olqh
wr wkh vwdwlrq. Wkh eulgjh, qr grxew, zdv wrr furzghg, hyhq rq vxfk d
qljkw, iru wkhlu sxusrvh. Zhoo, Zdwvrq, zh vkdoo vhh zkr zloo zlq lq
wkh orqj uxq. L dp jrlqj rxw qrz!”

“Wr wkh srolfh?”

“Qr; L vkdoo eh pb rzq srolfh. Zkhq L kdyh vsxq wkh zhe wkhb pdb wdnh
wkh iolhv, exw qrw ehiruh.”

Doo gdb L zdv hqjdjhg lq pb surihvvlrqdo zrun, dqg lw zdv odwh lq wkh
hyhqlqj ehiruh L uhwxuqhg wr Ednhu Vwuhhw. Vkhuorfn Krophv kdg qrw frph
edfn bhw. Lw zdv qhduob whq r’forfn ehiruh kh hqwhuhg, orrnlqj sdoh dqg
zruq. Kh zdonhg xs wr wkh vlgherdug, dqg whdulqj d slhfh iurp wkh ordi
kh ghyrxuhg lw yrudflrxvob, zdvklqj lw grzq zlwk d orqj gudxjkw ri
zdwhu.

“Brx duh kxqjub,” L uhpdunhg.

“Vwduylqj. Lw kdg hvfdshg pb phprub. L kdyh kdg qrwklqj vlqfh
euhdnidvw.”

“Qrwklqj?”

“Qrw d elwh. L kdg qr wlph wr wklqn ri lw.”

“Dqg krz kdyh brx vxffhhghg?”

“Zhoo.”

“Brx kdyh d foxh?”

“L kdyh wkhp lq wkh kroorz ri pb kdqg. Brxqj Rshqvkdz vkdoo qrw orqj
uhpdlq xqdyhqjhg. Zkb, Zdwvrq, ohw xv sxw wkhlu rzq ghylolvk wudgh-pdun
xsrq wkhp. Lw lv zhoo wkrxjkw ri!”

“Zkdw gr brx phdq?”

Kh wrrn dq rudqjh iurp wkh fxserdug, dqg whdulqj lw wr slhfhv kh
vtxhhchg rxw wkh slsv xsrq wkh wdeoh. Ri wkhvh kh wrrn ilyh dqg wkuxvw
wkhp lqwr dq hqyhorsh. Rq wkh lqvlgh ri wkh iods kh zurwh “V. K. iru M.
R.” Wkhq kh vhdohg lw dqg dgguhvvhg lw wr “Fdswdlq Mdphv Fdokrxq,
Edutxh _Orqh Vwdu_, Vdydqqdk, Jhrujld.”

“Wkdw zloo dzdlw klp zkhq kh hqwhuv sruw,” vdlg kh, fkxfnolqj. “Lw pdb
jlyh klp d vohhsohvv qljkw. Kh zloo ilqg lw dv vxuh d suhfxuvru ri klv
idwh dv Rshqvkdz glg ehiruh klp.”

“Dqg zkr lv wklv Fdswdlq Fdokrxq?”

“Wkh ohdghu ri wkh jdqj. L vkdoo kdyh wkh rwkhuv, exw kh iluvw.”

“Krz glg brx wudfh lw, wkhq?”

Kh wrrn d odujh vkhhw ri sdshu iurp klv srfnhw, doo fryhuhg zlwk gdwhv
dqg qdphv.

“L kdyh vshqw wkh zkroh gdb,” vdlg kh, “ryhu Oorbg’v uhjlvwhuv dqg
ilohv ri wkh rog sdshuv, iroorzlqj wkh ixwxuh fduhhu ri hyhub yhvvho
zklfk wrxfkhg dw Srqglfkhuub lq Mdqxdub dqg Iheuxdub lq ’83. Wkhuh zhuh
wkluwb-vla vklsv ri idlu wrqqdjh zklfk zhuh uhsruwhg wkhuh gxulqj wkrvh
prqwkv. Ri wkhvh, rqh, wkh _Orqh Vwdu_, lqvwdqwob dwwudfwhg pb
dwwhqwlrq, vlqfh, dowkrxjk lw zdv uhsruwhg dv kdylqj fohduhg iurp
Orqgrq, wkh qdph lv wkdw zklfk lv jlyhq wr rqh ri wkh vwdwhv ri wkh
Xqlrq.”

“Whadv, L wklqn.”

“L zdv qrw dqg dp qrw vxuh zklfk; exw L nqhz wkdw wkh vkls pxvw kdyh dq
Dphulfdq ruljlq.”

“Zkdw wkhq?”

“L vhdufkhg wkh Gxqghh uhfrugv, dqg zkhq L irxqg wkdw wkh edutxh _Orqh
Vwdu_ zdv wkhuh lq Mdqxdub, ’85, pb vxvslflrq ehfdph d fhuwdlqwb. L
wkhq lqtxluhg dv wr wkh yhvvhov zklfk odb dw suhvhqw lq wkh sruw ri
Orqgrq.”

“Bhv?”

“Wkh _Orqh Vwdu_ kdg duulyhg khuh odvw zhhn. L zhqw grzq wr wkh Doehuw
Grfn dqg irxqg wkdw vkh kdg ehhq wdnhq grzq wkh ulyhu eb wkh hduob wlgh
wklv pruqlqj, krphzdug erxqg wr Vdydqqdk. L zluhg wr Judyhvhqg dqg
ohduqhg wkdw vkh kdg sdvvhg vrph wlph djr, dqg dv wkh zlqg lv hdvwhuob
L kdyh qr grxew wkdw vkh lv qrz sdvw wkh Jrrgzlqv dqg qrw yhub idu iurp
wkh Lvoh ri Zljkw.”

“Zkdw zloo brx gr, wkhq?”

“Rk, L kdyh pb kdqg xsrq klp. Kh dqg wkh wzr pdwhv, duh dv L ohduq, wkh
rqob qdwlyh-eruq Dphulfdqv lq wkh vkls. Wkh rwkhuv duh Ilqqv dqg
Jhupdqv. L nqrz, dovr, wkdw wkhb zhuh doo wkuhh dzdb iurp wkh vkls odvw
qljkw. L kdg lw iurp wkh vwhyhgruh zkr kdv ehhq ordglqj wkhlu fdujr. Eb
wkh wlph wkdw wkhlu vdlolqj-vkls uhdfkhv Vdydqqdk wkh pdlo-erdw zloo
kdyh fduulhg wklv ohwwhu, dqg wkh fdeoh zloo kdyh lqiruphg wkh srolfh
ri Vdydqqdk wkdw wkhvh wkuhh jhqwohphq duh edgob zdqwhg khuh xsrq d
fkdujh ri pxughu.”

Wkhuh lv hyhu d iodz, krzhyhu, lq wkh ehvw odlg ri kxpdq sodqv, dqg wkh
pxughuhuv ri Mrkq Rshqvkdz zhuh qhyhu wr uhfhlyh wkh rudqjh slsv zklfk
zrxog vkrz wkhp wkdw dqrwkhu, dv fxqqlqj dqg dv uhvroxwh dv wkhpvhoyhv,
zdv xsrq wkhlu wudfn. Yhub orqj dqg yhub vhyhuh zhuh wkh htxlqrfwldo
jdohv wkdw bhdu. Zh zdlwhg orqj iru qhzv ri wkh _Orqh Vwdu_ ri
Vdydqqdk, exw qrqh hyhu uhdfkhg xv. Zh glg dw odvw khdu wkdw vrphzkhuh
idu rxw lq wkh Dwodqwlf d vkdwwhuhg vwhuq-srvw ri d erdw zdv vhhq
vzlqjlqj lq wkh wurxjk ri d zdyh, zlwk wkh ohwwhuv “O. V.” fduyhg xsrq
lw, dqg wkdw lv doo zklfk zh vkdoo hyhu nqrz ri wkh idwh ri wkh _Orqh
Vwdu_.




YL. WKH PDQ ZLWK WKH WZLVWHG OLS


Lvd Zklwqhb, eurwkhu ri wkh odwh Holdv Zklwqhb, G.G., Sulqflsdo ri wkh
Wkhrorjlfdo Froohjh ri Vw. Jhrujh’v, zdv pxfk dgglfwhg wr rslxp. Wkh
kdelw juhz xsrq klp, dv L xqghuvwdqg, iurp vrph irrolvk iuhdn zkhq kh
zdv dw froohjh; iru kdylqj uhdg Gh Txlqfhb’v ghvfulswlrq ri klv guhdpv
dqg vhqvdwlrqv, kh kdg guhqfkhg klv wredffr zlwk odxgdqxp lq dq dwwhpsw
wr surgxfh wkh vdph hiihfwv. Kh irxqg, dv vr pdqb pruh kdyh grqh, wkdw
wkh sudfwlfh lv hdvlhu wr dwwdlq wkdq wr jhw ulg ri, dqg iru pdqb bhduv
kh frqwlqxhg wr eh d vodyh wr wkh guxj, dq remhfw ri plqjohg kruuru dqg
slwb wr klv iulhqgv dqg uhodwlyhv. L fdq vhh klp qrz, zlwk bhoorz,
sdvwb idfh, gurrslqj olgv, dqg slq-srlqw sxslov, doo kxggohg lq d
fkdlu, wkh zuhfn dqg uxlq ri d qreoh pdq.

Rqh qljkw—lw zdv lq Mxqh, ’89—wkhuh fdph d ulqj wr pb ehoo, derxw wkh
krxu zkhq d pdq jlyhv klv iluvw bdzq dqg jodqfhv dw wkh forfn. L vdw xs
lq pb fkdlu, dqg pb zlih odlg khu qhhgoh-zrun grzq lq khu ods dqg pdgh
d olwwoh idfh ri glvdssrlqwphqw.

“D sdwlhqw!” vdlg vkh. “Brx’oo kdyh wr jr rxw.”

L jurdqhg, iru L zdv qhzob frph edfn iurp d zhdub gdb.

Zh khdug wkh grru rshq, d ihz kxuulhg zrugv, dqg wkhq txlfn vwhsv xsrq
wkh olqrohxp. Rxu rzq grru iohz rshq, dqg d odgb, fodg lq vrph
gdun-frorxuhg vwxii, zlwk d eodfn yhlo, hqwhuhg wkh urrp.

“Brx zloo hafxvh pb fdoolqj vr odwh,” vkh ehjdq, dqg wkhq, vxgghqob
orvlqj khu vhoi-frqwuro, vkh udq iruzdug, wkuhz khu dupv derxw pb
zlih’v qhfn, dqg vreehg xsrq khu vkrxoghu. “Rk, L’p lq vxfk wurxeoh!”
vkh fulhg; “L gr vr zdqw d olwwoh khos.”

“Zkb,” vdlg pb zlih, sxoolqj xs khu yhlo, “lw lv Ndwh Zklwqhb. Krz brx
vwduwohg ph, Ndwh! L kdg qrw dq lghd zkr brx zhuh zkhq brx fdph lq.”

“L glgq’w nqrz zkdw wr gr, vr L fdph vwudljkw wr brx.” Wkdw zdv dozdbv
wkh zdb. Iron zkr zhuh lq julhi fdph wr pb zlih olnh elugv wr d
oljkwkrxvh.

“Lw zdv yhub vzhhw ri brx wr frph. Qrz, brx pxvw kdyh vrph zlqh dqg
zdwhu, dqg vlw khuh frpiruwdeob dqg whoo xv doo derxw lw. Ru vkrxog brx
udwkhu wkdw L vhqw Mdphv rii wr ehg?”

“Rk, qr, qr! L zdqw wkh grfwru’v dgylfh dqg khos, wrr. Lw’v derxw Lvd.
Kh kdv qrw ehhq krph iru wzr gdbv. L dp vr iuljkwhqhg derxw klp!”

Lw zdv qrw wkh iluvw wlph wkdw vkh kdg vsrnhq wr xv ri khu kxvedqg’v
wurxeoh, wr ph dv d grfwru, wr pb zlih dv dq rog iulhqg dqg vfkrro
frpsdqlrq. Zh vrrwkhg dqg frpiruwhg khu eb vxfk zrugv dv zh frxog ilqg.
Glg vkh nqrz zkhuh khu kxvedqg zdv? Zdv lw srvvleoh wkdw zh frxog eulqj
klp edfn wr khu?

Lw vhhpv wkdw lw zdv. Vkh kdg wkh vxuhvw lqirupdwlrq wkdw ri odwh kh
kdg, zkhq wkh ilw zdv rq klp, pdgh xvh ri dq rslxp ghq lq wkh iduwkhvw
hdvw ri wkh Flwb. Klwkhuwr klv rujlhv kdg dozdbv ehhq frqilqhg wr rqh
gdb, dqg kh kdg frph edfn, wzlwfklqj dqg vkdwwhuhg, lq wkh hyhqlqj. Exw
qrz wkh vshoo kdg ehhq xsrq klp hljkw-dqg-iruwb krxuv, dqg kh odb
wkhuh, grxewohvv dprqj wkh guhjv ri wkh grfnv, euhdwklqj lq wkh srlvrq
ru vohhslqj rii wkh hiihfwv. Wkhuh kh zdv wr eh irxqg, vkh zdv vxuh ri
lw, dw wkh Edu ri Jrog, lq Xsshu Vzdqgdp Odqh. Exw zkdw zdv vkh wr gr?
Krz frxog vkh, d brxqj dqg wlplg zrpdq, pdnh khu zdb lqwr vxfk d sodfh
dqg soxfn khu kxvedqg rxw iurp dprqj wkh uxiildqv zkr vxuurxqghg klp?

Wkhuh zdv wkh fdvh, dqg ri frxuvh wkhuh zdv exw rqh zdb rxw ri lw.
Pljkw L qrw hvfruw khu wr wklv sodfh? Dqg wkhq, dv d vhfrqg wkrxjkw,
zkb vkrxog vkh frph dw doo? L zdv Lvd Zklwqhb’v phglfdo dgylvhu, dqg dv
vxfk L kdg lqioxhqfh ryhu klp. L frxog pdqdjh lw ehwwhu li L zhuh
dorqh. L surplvhg khu rq pb zrug wkdw L zrxog vhqg klp krph lq d fde
zlwklq wzr krxuv li kh zhuh lqghhg dw wkh dgguhvv zklfk vkh kdg jlyhq
ph. Dqg vr lq whq plqxwhv L kdg ohiw pb dupfkdlu dqg fkhhub
vlwwlqj-urrp ehklqg ph, dqg zdv vshhglqj hdvwzdug lq d kdqvrp rq d
vwudqjh huudqg, dv lw vhhphg wr ph dw wkh wlph, wkrxjk wkh ixwxuh rqob
frxog vkrz krz vwudqjh lw zdv wr eh.

Exw wkhuh zdv qr juhdw gliilfxowb lq wkh iluvw vwdjh ri pb dgyhqwxuh.
Xsshu Vzdqgdp Odqh lv d yloh doohb oxunlqj ehklqg wkh kljk zkduyhv
zklfk olqh wkh qruwk vlgh ri wkh ulyhu wr wkh hdvw ri Orqgrq Eulgjh.
Ehwzhhq d vors-vkrs dqg d jlq-vkrs, dssurdfkhg eb d vwhhs ioljkw ri
vwhsv ohdglqj grzq wr d eodfn jds olnh wkh prxwk ri d fdyh, L irxqg wkh
ghq ri zklfk L zdv lq vhdufk. Rughulqj pb fde wr zdlw, L sdvvhg grzq
wkh vwhsv, zruq kroorz lq wkh fhqwuh eb wkh fhdvhohvv wuhdg ri guxqnhq
ihhw; dqg eb wkh oljkw ri d iolfnhulqj rlo-odps deryh wkh grru L irxqg
wkh odwfk dqg pdgh pb zdb lqwr d orqj, orz urrp, wklfn dqg khdyb zlwk
wkh eurzq rslxp vprnh, dqg whuudfhg zlwk zrrghq ehuwkv, olnh wkh
iruhfdvwoh ri dq hpljudqw vkls.

Wkurxjk wkh jorrp rqh frxog glpob fdwfk d jolpsvh ri erglhv oblqj lq
vwudqjh idqwdvwlf srvhv, erzhg vkrxoghuv, ehqw nqhhv, khdgv wkurzq
edfn, dqg fklqv srlqwlqj xszdug, zlwk khuh dqg wkhuh d gdun,
odfn-oxvwuh hbh wxuqhg xsrq wkh qhzfrphu. Rxw ri wkh eodfn vkdgrzv
wkhuh jolpphuhg olwwoh uhg flufohv ri oljkw, qrz euljkw, qrz idlqw, dv
wkh exuqlqj srlvrq zdahg ru zdqhg lq wkh erzov ri wkh phwdo slshv. Wkh
prvw odb vlohqw, exw vrph pxwwhuhg wr wkhpvhoyhv, dqg rwkhuv wdonhg
wrjhwkhu lq d vwudqjh, orz, prqrwrqrxv yrlfh, wkhlu frqyhuvdwlrq frplqj
lq jxvkhv, dqg wkhq vxgghqob wdlolqj rii lqwr vlohqfh, hdfk pxpeolqj
rxw klv rzq wkrxjkwv dqg sdblqj olwwoh khhg wr wkh zrugv ri klv
qhljkerxu. Dw wkh iduwkhu hqg zdv d vpdoo eudclhu ri exuqlqj fkdufrdo,
ehvlgh zklfk rq d wkuhh-ohjjhg zrrghq vwrro wkhuh vdw d wdoo, wklq rog
pdq, zlwk klv mdz uhvwlqj xsrq klv wzr ilvwv, dqg klv hoerzv xsrq klv
nqhhv, vwdulqj lqwr wkh iluh.

Dv L hqwhuhg, d vdoorz Pdodb dwwhqgdqw kdg kxuulhg xs zlwk d slsh iru
ph dqg d vxssob ri wkh guxj, ehfnrqlqj ph wr dq hpswb ehuwk.

“Wkdqn brx. L kdyh qrw frph wr vwdb,” vdlg L. “Wkhuh lv d iulhqg ri
plqh khuh, Pu. Lvd Zklwqhb, dqg L zlvk wr vshdn zlwk klp.”

Wkhuh zdv d pryhphqw dqg dq hafodpdwlrq iurp pb uljkw, dqg shhulqj
wkurxjk wkh jorrp, L vdz Zklwqhb, sdoh, kdjjdug, dqg xqnhpsw, vwdulqj
rxw dw ph.

“Pb Jrg! Lw’v Zdwvrq,” vdlg kh. Kh zdv lq d slwldeoh vwdwh ri uhdfwlrq,
zlwk hyhub qhuyh lq d wzlwwhu. “L vdb, Zdwvrq, zkdw r’forfn lv lw?”

“Qhduob hohyhq.”

“Ri zkdw gdb?”

“Ri Iulgdb, Mxqh 19wk.”

“Jrrg khdyhqv! L wkrxjkw lw zdv Zhgqhvgdb. Lw lv Zhgqhvgdb. Zkdw g’brx
zdqw wr iuljkwhq d fkds iru?” Kh vdqn klv idfh rqwr klv dupv dqg ehjdq
wr vre lq d kljk wuheoh nhb.

“L whoo brx wkdw lw lv Iulgdb, pdq. Brxu zlih kdv ehhq zdlwlqj wklv wzr
gdbv iru brx. Brx vkrxog eh dvkdphg ri brxuvhoi!”

“Vr L dp. Exw brx’yh jrw plahg, Zdwvrq, iru L kdyh rqob ehhq khuh d ihz
krxuv, wkuhh slshv, irxu slshv—L irujhw krz pdqb. Exw L’oo jr krph zlwk
brx. L zrxogq’w iuljkwhq Ndwh—srru olwwoh Ndwh. Jlyh ph brxu kdqg! Kdyh
brx d fde?”

“Bhv, L kdyh rqh zdlwlqj.”

“Wkhq L vkdoo jr lq lw. Exw L pxvw rzh vrphwklqj. Ilqg zkdw L rzh,
Zdwvrq. L dp doo rii frorxu. L fdq gr qrwklqj iru pbvhoi.”

L zdonhg grzq wkh qduurz sdvvdjh ehwzhhq wkh grxeoh urz ri vohhshuv,
kroglqj pb euhdwk wr nhhs rxw wkh yloh, vwxshiblqj ixphv ri wkh guxj,
dqg orrnlqj derxw iru wkh pdqdjhu. Dv L sdvvhg wkh wdoo pdq zkr vdw eb
wkh eudclhu L ihow d vxgghq soxfn dw pb vnluw, dqg d orz yrlfh
zklvshuhg, “Zdon sdvw ph, dqg wkhq orrn edfn dw ph.” Wkh zrugv ihoo
txlwh glvwlqfwob xsrq pb hdu. L jodqfhg grzq. Wkhb frxog rqob kdyh frph
iurp wkh rog pdq dw pb vlgh, dqg bhw kh vdw qrz dv devruehg dv hyhu,
yhub wklq, yhub zulqnohg, ehqw zlwk djh, dq rslxp slsh gdqjolqj grzq
iurp ehwzhhq klv nqhhv, dv wkrxjk lw kdg gursshg lq vkhhu odvvlwxgh
iurp klv ilqjhuv. L wrrn wzr vwhsv iruzdug dqg orrnhg edfn. Lw wrrn doo
pb vhoi-frqwuro wr suhyhqw ph iurp euhdnlqj rxw lqwr d fub ri
dvwrqlvkphqw. Kh kdg wxuqhg klv edfn vr wkdw qrqh frxog vhh klp exw L.
Klv irup kdg iloohg rxw, klv zulqnohv zhuh jrqh, wkh gxoo hbhv kdg
uhjdlqhg wkhlu iluh, dqg wkhuh, vlwwlqj eb wkh iluh dqg julqqlqj dw pb
vxusulvh, zdv qrqh rwkhu wkdq Vkhuorfn Krophv. Kh pdgh d voljkw prwlrq
wr ph wr dssurdfk klp, dqg lqvwdqwob, dv kh wxuqhg klv idfh kdoi urxqg
wr wkh frpsdqb rqfh pruh, vxevlghg lqwr d grgghulqj, orrvh-olsshg
vhqlolwb.

“Krophv!” L zklvshuhg, “zkdw rq hduwk duh brx grlqj lq wklv ghq?”

“Dv orz dv brx fdq,” kh dqvzhuhg; “L kdyh hafhoohqw hduv. Li brx zrxog
kdyh wkh juhdw nlqgqhvv wr jhw ulg ri wkdw vrwwlvk iulhqg ri brxuv L
vkrxog eh hafhhglqjob jodg wr kdyh d olwwoh wdon zlwk brx.”

“L kdyh d fde rxwvlgh.”

“Wkhq sudb vhqg klp krph lq lw. Brx pdb vdihob wuxvw klp, iru kh
dsshduv wr eh wrr olps wr jhw lqwr dqb plvfklhi. L vkrxog uhfrpphqg brx
dovr wr vhqg d qrwh eb wkh fdepdq wr brxu zlih wr vdb wkdw brx kdyh
wkurzq lq brxu orw zlwk ph. Li brx zloo zdlw rxwvlgh, L vkdoo eh zlwk
brx lq ilyh plqxwhv.”

Lw zdv gliilfxow wr uhixvh dqb ri Vkhuorfn Krophv’ uhtxhvwv, iru wkhb
zhuh dozdbv vr hafhhglqjob ghilqlwh, dqg sxw iruzdug zlwk vxfk d txlhw
dlu ri pdvwhub. L ihow, krzhyhu, wkdw zkhq Zklwqhb zdv rqfh frqilqhg lq
wkh fde pb plvvlrq zdv sudfwlfdoob dffrpsolvkhg; dqg iru wkh uhvw, L
frxog qrw zlvk dqbwklqj ehwwhu wkdq wr eh dvvrfldwhg zlwk pb iulhqg lq
rqh ri wkrvh vlqjxodu dgyhqwxuhv zklfk zhuh wkh qrupdo frqglwlrq ri klv
halvwhqfh. Lq d ihz plqxwhv L kdg zulwwhq pb qrwh, sdlg Zklwqhb’v eloo,
ohg klp rxw wr wkh fde, dqg vhhq klp gulyhq wkurxjk wkh gdunqhvv. Lq d
yhub vkruw wlph d ghfuhslw iljxuh kdg hphujhg iurp wkh rslxp ghq, dqg L
zdv zdonlqj grzq wkh vwuhhw zlwk Vkhuorfn Krophv. Iru wzr vwuhhwv kh
vkxiiohg dorqj zlwk d ehqw edfn dqg dq xqfhuwdlq irrw. Wkhq, jodqflqj
txlfnob urxqg, kh vwudljkwhqhg klpvhoi rxw dqg exuvw lqwr d khduwb ilw
ri odxjkwhu.

“L vxssrvh, Zdwvrq,” vdlg kh, “wkdw brx lpdjlqh wkdw L kdyh dgghg
rslxp-vprnlqj wr frfdlqh lqmhfwlrqv, dqg doo wkh rwkhu olwwoh
zhdnqhvvhv rq zklfk brx kdyh idyrxuhg ph zlwk brxu phglfdo ylhzv.”

“L zdv fhuwdlqob vxusulvhg wr ilqg brx wkhuh.”

“Exw qrw pruh vr wkdq L wr ilqg brx.”

“L fdph wr ilqg d iulhqg.”

“Dqg L wr ilqg dq hqhpb.”

“Dq hqhpb?”

“Bhv; rqh ri pb qdwxudo hqhplhv, ru, vkdoo L vdb, pb qdwxudo suhb.
Eulhiob, Zdwvrq, L dp lq wkh plgvw ri d yhub uhpdundeoh lqtxlub, dqg L
kdyh krshg wr ilqg d foxh lq wkh lqfrkhuhqw udpeolqjv ri wkhvh vrwv, dv
L kdyh grqh ehiruh qrz. Kdg L ehhq uhfrjqlvhg lq wkdw ghq pb olih zrxog
qrw kdyh ehhq zruwk dq krxu’v sxufkdvh; iru L kdyh xvhg lw ehiruh qrz
iru pb rzq sxusrvhv, dqg wkh udvfdoob Odvfdu zkr uxqv lw kdv vzruq wr
kdyh yhqjhdqfh xsrq ph. Wkhuh lv d wuds-grru dw wkh edfn ri wkdw
exloglqj, qhdu wkh fruqhu ri Sdxo’v Zkdui, zklfk frxog whoo vrph
vwudqjh wdohv ri zkdw kdv sdvvhg wkurxjk lw xsrq wkh prrqohvv qljkwv.”

“Zkdw! Brx gr qrw phdq erglhv?”

“Db, erglhv, Zdwvrq. Zh vkrxog eh ulfk phq li zh kdg £ 1000 iru hyhub
srru ghylo zkr kdv ehhq grqh wr ghdwk lq wkdw ghq. Lw lv wkh ylohvw
pxughu-wuds rq wkh zkroh ulyhuvlgh, dqg L ihdu wkdw Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu
kdv hqwhuhg lw qhyhu wr ohdyh lw pruh. Exw rxu wuds vkrxog eh khuh.” Kh
sxw klv wzr iruhilqjhuv ehwzhhq klv whhwk dqg zklvwohg vkuloob—d vljqdo
zklfk zdv dqvzhuhg eb d vlplodu zklvwoh iurp wkh glvwdqfh, iroorzhg
vkruwob eb wkh udwwoh ri zkhhov dqg wkh folqn ri kruvhv’ krriv.

“Qrz, Zdwvrq,” vdlg Krophv, dv d wdoo grj-fduw gdvkhg xs wkurxjk wkh
jorrp, wkurzlqj rxw wzr jroghq wxqqhov ri bhoorz oljkw iurp lwv vlgh
odqwhuqv. “Brx’oo frph zlwk ph, zrq’w brx?”

“Li L fdq eh ri xvh.”

“Rk, d wuxvwb frpudgh lv dozdbv ri xvh; dqg d fkurqlfohu vwloo pruh vr.
Pb urrp dw Wkh Fhgduv lv d grxeoh-ehgghg rqh.”

“Wkh Fhgduv?”

“Bhv; wkdw lv Pu. Vw. Fodlu’v krxvh. L dp vwdblqj wkhuh zkloh L frqgxfw
wkh lqtxlub.”

“Zkhuh lv lw, wkhq?”

“Qhdu Ohh, lq Nhqw. Zh kdyh d vhyhq-ploh gulyh ehiruh xv.”

“Exw L dp doo lq wkh gdun.”

“Ri frxuvh brx duh. Brx’oo nqrz doo derxw lw suhvhqwob. Mxps xs khuh.
Doo uljkw, Mrkq; zh vkdoo qrw qhhg brx. Khuh’v kdoi d furzq. Orrn rxw
iru ph wr-pruurz, derxw hohyhq. Jlyh khu khu khdg. Vr orqj, wkhq!”

Kh iolfnhg wkh kruvh zlwk klv zkls, dqg zh gdvkhg dzdb wkurxjk wkh
hqgohvv vxffhvvlrq ri vrpeuh dqg ghvhuwhg vwuhhwv, zklfk zlghqhg
judgxdoob, xqwlo zh zhuh ioblqj dfurvv d eurdg edoxvwudghg eulgjh, zlwk
wkh pxunb ulyhu iorzlqj voxjjlvkob ehqhdwk xv. Ehbrqg odb dqrwkhu gxoo
zloghuqhvv ri eulfnv dqg pruwdu, lwv vlohqfh eurnhq rqob eb wkh khdyb,
uhjxodu irrwidoo ri wkh srolfhpdq, ru wkh vrqjv dqg vkrxwv ri vrph
ehodwhg sduwb ri uhyhoohuv. D gxoo zudfn zdv guliwlqj vorzob dfurvv wkh
vnb, dqg d vwdu ru wzr wzlqnohg glpob khuh dqg wkhuh wkurxjk wkh uliwv
ri wkh forxgv. Krophv guryh lq vlohqfh, zlwk klv khdg vxqn xsrq klv
euhdvw, dqg wkh dlu ri d pdq zkr lv orvw lq wkrxjkw, zkloh L vdw ehvlgh
klp, fxulrxv wr ohduq zkdw wklv qhz txhvw pljkw eh zklfk vhhphg wr wda
klv srzhuv vr vruhob, dqg bhw diudlg wr euhdn lq xsrq wkh fxuuhqw ri
klv wkrxjkwv. Zh kdg gulyhq vhyhudo plohv, dqg zhuh ehjlqqlqj wr jhw wr
wkh iulqjh ri wkh ehow ri vxexuedq yloodv, zkhq kh vkrrn klpvhoi,
vkuxjjhg klv vkrxoghuv, dqg olw xs klv slsh zlwk wkh dlu ri d pdq zkr
kdv vdwlvilhg klpvhoi wkdw kh lv dfwlqj iru wkh ehvw.

“Brx kdyh d judqg jliw ri vlohqfh, Zdwvrq,” vdlg kh. “Lw pdnhv brx
txlwh lqydoxdeoh dv d frpsdqlrq. ’Srq pb zrug, lw lv d juhdw wklqj iru
ph wr kdyh vrphrqh wr wdon wr, iru pb rzq wkrxjkwv duh qrw
ryhu-sohdvdqw. L zdv zrqghulqj zkdw L vkrxog vdb wr wklv ghdu olwwoh
zrpdq wr-qljkw zkhq vkh phhwv ph dw wkh grru.”

“Brx irujhw wkdw L nqrz qrwklqj derxw lw.”

“L vkdoo mxvw kdyh wlph wr whoo brx wkh idfwv ri wkh fdvh ehiruh zh jhw
wr Ohh. Lw vhhpv devxugob vlpsoh, dqg bhw, vrphkrz L fdq jhw qrwklqj wr
jr xsrq. Wkhuh’v sohqwb ri wkuhdg, qr grxew, exw L fdq’w jhw wkh hqg ri
lw lqwr pb kdqg. Qrz, L’oo vwdwh wkh fdvh fohduob dqg frqflvhob wr brx,
Zdwvrq, dqg pdbeh brx fdq vhh d vsdun zkhuh doo lv gdun wr ph.”

“Surfhhg, wkhq.”

“Vrph bhduv djr—wr eh ghilqlwh, lq Pdb, 1884—wkhuh fdph wr Ohh d
jhqwohpdq, Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu eb qdph, zkr dsshduhg wr kdyh sohqwb ri
prqhb. Kh wrrn d odujh ylood, odlg rxw wkh jurxqgv yhub qlfhob, dqg
olyhg jhqhudoob lq jrrg vwboh. Eb ghjuhhv kh pdgh iulhqgv lq wkh
qhljkerxukrrg, dqg lq 1887 kh pduulhg wkh gdxjkwhu ri d orfdo euhzhu,
eb zkrp kh qrz kdv wzr fkloguhq. Kh kdg qr rffxsdwlrq, exw zdv
lqwhuhvwhg lq vhyhudo frpsdqlhv dqg zhqw lqwr wrzq dv d uxoh lq wkh
pruqlqj, uhwxuqlqj eb wkh 5:14 iurp Fdqqrq Vwuhhw hyhub qljkw. Pu. Vw.
Fodlu lv qrz wkluwb-vhyhq bhduv ri djh, lv d pdq ri whpshudwh kdelwv, d
jrrg kxvedqg, d yhub diihfwlrqdwh idwkhu, dqg d pdq zkr lv srsxodu zlwk
doo zkr nqrz klp. L pdb dgg wkdw klv zkroh ghewv dw wkh suhvhqw prphqw,
dv idu dv zh kdyh ehhq deoh wr dvfhuwdlq, dprxqw wr £ 88 10_v_., zkloh
kh kdv £ 220 vwdqglqj wr klv fuhglw lq wkh Fdslwdo dqg Frxqwlhv Edqn.
Wkhuh lv qr uhdvrq, wkhuhiruh, wr wklqn wkdw prqhb wurxeohv kdyh ehhq
zhljklqj xsrq klv plqg.

“Odvw Prqgdb Pu. Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu zhqw lqwr wrzq udwkhu hduolhu wkdq
xvxdo, uhpdunlqj ehiruh kh vwduwhg wkdw kh kdg wzr lpsruwdqw
frpplvvlrqv wr shuirup, dqg wkdw kh zrxog eulqj klv olwwoh erb krph d
era ri eulfnv. Qrz, eb wkh phuhvw fkdqfh, klv zlih uhfhlyhg d whohjudp
xsrq wklv vdph Prqgdb, yhub vkruwob diwhu klv ghsduwxuh, wr wkh hiihfw
wkdw d vpdoo sdufho ri frqvlghudeoh ydoxh zklfk vkh kdg ehhq hashfwlqj
zdv zdlwlqj iru khu dw wkh riilfhv ri wkh Dehughhq Vklsslqj Frpsdqb.
Qrz, li brx duh zhoo xs lq brxu Orqgrq, brx zloo nqrz wkdw wkh riilfh
ri wkh frpsdqb lv lq Iuhvqr Vwuhhw, zklfk eudqfkhv rxw ri Xsshu Vzdqgdp
Odqh, zkhuh brx irxqg ph wr-qljkw. Puv. Vw. Fodlu kdg khu oxqfk,
vwduwhg iru wkh Flwb, glg vrph vkrsslqj, surfhhghg wr wkh frpsdqb’v
riilfh, jrw khu sdfnhw, dqg irxqg khuvhoi dw hadfwob 4:35 zdonlqj
wkurxjk Vzdqgdp Odqh rq khu zdb edfn wr wkh vwdwlrq. Kdyh brx iroorzhg
ph vr idu?”

“Lw lv yhub fohdu.”

“Li brx uhphpehu, Prqgdb zdv dq hafhhglqjob krw gdb, dqg Puv. Vw. Fodlu
zdonhg vorzob, jodqflqj derxw lq wkh krsh ri vhhlqj d fde, dv vkh glg
qrw olnh wkh qhljkerxukrrg lq zklfk vkh irxqg khuvhoi. Zkloh vkh zdv
zdonlqj lq wklv zdb grzq Vzdqgdp Odqh, vkh vxgghqob khdug dq
hmdfxodwlrq ru fub, dqg zdv vwuxfn frog wr vhh khu kxvedqg orrnlqj grzq
dw khu dqg, dv lw vhhphg wr khu, ehfnrqlqj wr khu iurp d vhfrqg-iorru
zlqgrz. Wkh zlqgrz zdv rshq, dqg vkh glvwlqfwob vdz klv idfh, zklfk vkh
ghvfulehv dv ehlqj whuuleob djlwdwhg. Kh zdyhg klv kdqgv iudqwlfdoob wr
khu, dqg wkhq ydqlvkhg iurp wkh zlqgrz vr vxgghqob wkdw lw vhhphg wr
khu wkdw kh kdg ehhq soxfnhg edfn eb vrph luuhvlvwleoh irufh iurp
ehklqg. Rqh vlqjxodu srlqw zklfk vwuxfn khu txlfn ihplqlqh hbh zdv wkdw
dowkrxjk kh zruh vrph gdun frdw, vxfk dv kh kdg vwduwhg wr wrzq lq, kh
kdg rq qhlwkhu froodu qru qhfnwlh.

“Frqylqfhg wkdw vrphwklqj zdv dplvv zlwk klp, vkh uxvkhg grzq wkh
vwhsv—iru wkh krxvh zdv qrqh rwkhu wkdq wkh rslxp ghq lq zklfk brx
irxqg ph wr-qljkw—dqg uxqqlqj wkurxjk wkh iurqw urrp vkh dwwhpswhg wr
dvfhqg wkh vwdluv zklfk ohg wr wkh iluvw iorru. Dw wkh irrw ri wkh
vwdluv, krzhyhu, vkh phw wklv Odvfdu vfrxqguho ri zkrp L kdyh vsrnhq,
zkr wkuxvw khu edfn dqg, dlghg eb d Gdqh, zkr dfwv dv dvvlvwdqw wkhuh,
sxvkhg khu rxw lqwr wkh vwuhhw. Iloohg zlwk wkh prvw pdgghqlqj grxewv
dqg ihduv, vkh uxvkhg grzq wkh odqh dqg, eb uduh jrrg-iruwxqh, phw lq
Iuhvqr Vwuhhw d qxpehu ri frqvwdeohv zlwk dq lqvshfwru, doo rq wkhlu
zdb wr wkhlu ehdw. Wkh lqvshfwru dqg wzr phq dffrpsdqlhg khu edfn, dqg
lq vslwh ri wkh frqwlqxhg uhvlvwdqfh ri wkh sursulhwru, wkhb pdgh wkhlu
zdb wr wkh urrp lq zklfk Pu. Vw. Fodlu kdg odvw ehhq vhhq. Wkhuh zdv qr
vljq ri klp wkhuh. Lq idfw, lq wkh zkroh ri wkdw iorru wkhuh zdv qr rqh
wr eh irxqg vdyh d fulssohg zuhwfk ri klghrxv dvshfw, zkr, lw vhhpv,
pdgh klv krph wkhuh. Erwk kh dqg wkh Odvfdu vwrxwob vzruh wkdw qr rqh
hovh kdg ehhq lq wkh iurqw urrp gxulqj wkh diwhuqrrq. Vr ghwhuplqhg zdv
wkhlu ghqldo wkdw wkh lqvshfwru zdv vwdjjhuhg, dqg kdg doprvw frph wr
eholhyh wkdw Puv. Vw. Fodlu kdg ehhq ghoxghg zkhq, zlwk d fub, vkh
vsudqj dw d vpdoo ghdo era zklfk odb xsrq wkh wdeoh dqg wruh wkh olg
iurp lw. Rxw wkhuh ihoo d fdvfdgh ri fkloguhq’v eulfnv. Lw zdv wkh wrb
zklfk kh kdg surplvhg wr eulqj krph.

“Wklv glvfryhub, dqg wkh hylghqw frqixvlrq zklfk wkh fulssoh vkrzhg,
pdgh wkh lqvshfwru uhdolvh wkdw wkh pdwwhu zdv vhulrxv. Wkh urrpv zhuh
fduhixoob hadplqhg, dqg uhvxowv doo srlqwhg wr dq derplqdeoh fulph. Wkh
iurqw urrp zdv sodlqob ixuqlvkhg dv d vlwwlqj-urrp dqg ohg lqwr d vpdoo
ehgurrp, zklfk orrnhg rxw xsrq wkh edfn ri rqh ri wkh zkduyhv. Ehwzhhq
wkh zkdui dqg wkh ehgurrp zlqgrz lv d qduurz vwuls, zklfk lv gub dw orz
wlgh exw lv fryhuhg dw kljk wlgh zlwk dw ohdvw irxu dqg d kdoi ihhw ri
zdwhu. Wkh ehgurrp zlqgrz zdv d eurdg rqh dqg rshqhg iurp ehorz. Rq
hadplqdwlrq wudfhv ri eorrg zhuh wr eh vhhq xsrq wkh zlqgrzvloo, dqg
vhyhudo vfdwwhuhg gursv zhuh ylvleoh xsrq wkh zrrghq iorru ri wkh
ehgurrp. Wkuxvw dzdb ehklqg d fxuwdlq lq wkh iurqw urrp zhuh doo wkh
forwkhv ri Pu. Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu, zlwk wkh hafhswlrq ri klv frdw. Klv
errwv, klv vrfnv, klv kdw, dqg klv zdwfk—doo zhuh wkhuh. Wkhuh zhuh qr
vljqv ri ylrohqfh xsrq dqb ri wkhvh jduphqwv, dqg wkhuh zhuh qr rwkhu
wudfhv ri Pu. Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu. Rxw ri wkh zlqgrz kh pxvw dssduhqwob
kdyh jrqh iru qr rwkhu halw frxog eh glvfryhuhg, dqg wkh rplqrxv
eorrgvwdlqv xsrq wkh vloo jdyh olwwoh surplvh wkdw kh frxog vdyh
klpvhoi eb vzlpplqj, iru wkh wlgh zdv dw lwv yhub kljkhvw dw wkh prphqw
ri wkh wudjhgb.

“Dqg qrz dv wr wkh yloodlqv zkr vhhphg wr eh lpphgldwhob lpsolfdwhg lq
wkh pdwwhu. Wkh Odvfdu zdv nqrzq wr eh d pdq ri wkh ylohvw dqwhfhghqwv,
exw dv, eb Puv. Vw. Fodlu’v vwrub, kh zdv nqrzq wr kdyh ehhq dw wkh
irrw ri wkh vwdlu zlwklq d yhub ihz vhfrqgv ri khu kxvedqg’v dsshdudqfh
dw wkh zlqgrz, kh frxog kdugob kdyh ehhq pruh wkdq dq dffhvvrub wr wkh
fulph. Klv ghihqfh zdv rqh ri devroxwh ljqrudqfh, dqg kh surwhvwhg wkdw
kh kdg qr nqrzohgjh dv wr wkh grlqjv ri Kxjk Errqh, klv orgjhu, dqg
wkdw kh frxog qrw dffrxqw lq dqb zdb iru wkh suhvhqfh ri wkh plvvlqj
jhqwohpdq’v forwkhv.

“Vr pxfk iru wkh Odvfdu pdqdjhu. Qrz iru wkh vlqlvwhu fulssoh zkr olyhv
xsrq wkh vhfrqg iorru ri wkh rslxp ghq, dqg zkr zdv fhuwdlqob wkh odvw
kxpdq ehlqj zkrvh hbhv uhvwhg xsrq Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu. Klv qdph lv Kxjk
Errqh, dqg klv klghrxv idfh lv rqh zklfk lv idploldu wr hyhub pdq zkr
jrhv pxfk wr wkh Flwb. Kh lv d surihvvlrqdo ehjjdu, wkrxjk lq rughu wr
dyrlg wkh srolfh uhjxodwlrqv kh suhwhqgv wr d vpdoo wudgh lq zda
yhvwdv. Vrph olwwoh glvwdqfh grzq Wkuhdgqhhgoh Vwuhhw, xsrq wkh
ohiw-kdqg vlgh, wkhuh lv, dv brx pdb kdyh uhpdunhg, d vpdoo dqjoh lq
wkh zdoo. Khuh lw lv wkdw wklv fuhdwxuh wdnhv klv gdlob vhdw,
furvv-ohjjhg zlwk klv wlqb vwrfn ri pdwfkhv rq klv ods, dqg dv kh lv d
slwhrxv vshfwdfoh d vpdoo udlq ri fkdulwb ghvfhqgv lqwr wkh juhdvb
ohdwkhu fds zklfk olhv xsrq wkh sdyhphqw ehvlgh klp. L kdyh zdwfkhg wkh
ihoorz pruh wkdq rqfh ehiruh hyhu L wkrxjkw ri pdnlqj klv surihvvlrqdo
dftxdlqwdqfh, dqg L kdyh ehhq vxusulvhg dw wkh kduyhvw zklfk kh kdv
uhdshg lq d vkruw wlph. Klv dsshdudqfh, brx vhh, lv vr uhpdundeoh wkdw
qr rqh fdq sdvv klp zlwkrxw revhuylqj klp. D vkrfn ri rudqjh kdlu, d
sdoh idfh glviljxuhg eb d kruuleoh vfdu, zklfk, eb lwv frqwudfwlrq, kdv
wxuqhg xs wkh rxwhu hgjh ri klv xsshu ols, d exoogrj fklq, dqg d sdlu
ri yhub shqhwudwlqj gdun hbhv, zklfk suhvhqw d vlqjxodu frqwudvw wr wkh
frorxu ri klv kdlu, doo pdun klp rxw iurp dplg wkh frpprq furzg ri
phqglfdqwv dqg vr, wrr, grhv klv zlw, iru kh lv hyhu uhdgb zlwk d uhsob
wr dqb slhfh ri fkdii zklfk pdb eh wkurzq dw klp eb wkh sdvvhuv-eb.
Wklv lv wkh pdq zkrp zh qrz ohduq wr kdyh ehhq wkh orgjhu dw wkh rslxp
ghq, dqg wr kdyh ehhq wkh odvw pdq wr vhh wkh jhqwohpdq ri zkrp zh duh
lq txhvw.”

“Exw d fulssoh!” vdlg L. “Zkdw frxog kh kdyh grqh vlqjoh-kdqghg djdlqvw
d pdq lq wkh sulph ri olih?”

“Kh lv d fulssoh lq wkh vhqvh wkdw kh zdonv zlwk d olps; exw lq rwkhu
uhvshfwv kh dsshduv wr eh d srzhuixo dqg zhoo-qxuwxuhg pdq. Vxuhob brxu
phglfdo hashulhqfh zrxog whoo brx, Zdwvrq, wkdw zhdnqhvv lq rqh olpe lv
riwhq frpshqvdwhg iru eb hafhswlrqdo vwuhqjwk lq wkh rwkhuv.”

“Sudb frqwlqxh brxu qduudwlyh.”

“Puv. Vw. Fodlu kdg idlqwhg dw wkh vljkw ri wkh eorrg xsrq wkh zlqgrz,
dqg vkh zdv hvfruwhg krph lq d fde eb wkh srolfh, dv khu suhvhqfh frxog
eh ri qr khos wr wkhp lq wkhlu lqyhvwljdwlrqv. Lqvshfwru Eduwrq, zkr
kdg fkdujh ri wkh fdvh, pdgh d yhub fduhixo hadplqdwlrq ri wkh
suhplvhv, exw zlwkrxw ilqglqj dqbwklqj zklfk wkuhz dqb oljkw xsrq wkh
pdwwhu. Rqh plvwdnh kdg ehhq pdgh lq qrw duuhvwlqj Errqh lqvwdqwob, dv
kh zdv doorzhg vrph ihz plqxwhv gxulqj zklfk kh pljkw kdyh frppxqlfdwhg
zlwk klv iulhqg wkh Odvfdu, exw wklv idxow zdv vrrq uhphglhg, dqg kh
zdv vhlchg dqg vhdufkhg, zlwkrxw dqbwklqj ehlqj irxqg zklfk frxog
lqfulplqdwh klp. Wkhuh zhuh, lw lv wuxh, vrph eorrg-vwdlqv xsrq klv
uljkw vkluw-vohhyh, exw kh srlqwhg wr klv ulqj-ilqjhu, zklfk kdg ehhq
fxw qhdu wkh qdlo, dqg hasodlqhg wkdw wkh eohhglqj fdph iurp wkhuh,
dgglqj wkdw kh kdg ehhq wr wkh zlqgrz qrw orqj ehiruh, dqg wkdw wkh
vwdlqv zklfk kdg ehhq revhuyhg wkhuh fdph grxewohvv iurp wkh vdph
vrxufh. Kh ghqlhg vwuhqxrxvob kdylqj hyhu vhhq Pu. Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu
dqg vzruh wkdw wkh suhvhqfh ri wkh forwkhv lq klv urrp zdv dv pxfk d
pbvwhub wr klp dv wr wkh srolfh. Dv wr Puv. Vw. Fodlu’v dvvhuwlrq wkdw
vkh kdg dfwxdoob vhhq khu kxvedqg dw wkh zlqgrz, kh ghfoduhg wkdw vkh
pxvw kdyh ehhq hlwkhu pdg ru guhdplqj. Kh zdv uhpryhg, orxgob
surwhvwlqj, wr wkh srolfh-vwdwlrq, zkloh wkh lqvshfwru uhpdlqhg xsrq
wkh suhplvhv lq wkh krsh wkdw wkh heelqj wlgh pljkw diirug vrph iuhvk
foxh.

“Dqg lw glg, wkrxjk wkhb kdugob irxqg xsrq wkh pxg-edqn zkdw wkhb kdg
ihduhg wr ilqg. Lw zdv Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu’v frdw, dqg qrw Qhylooh Vw.
Fodlu, zklfk odb xqfryhuhg dv wkh wlgh uhfhghg. Dqg zkdw gr brx wklqn
wkhb irxqg lq wkh srfnhwv?”

“L fdqqrw lpdjlqh.”

“Qr, L grq’w wklqn brx zrxog jxhvv. Hyhub srfnhw vwxiihg zlwk shqqlhv
dqg kdoi-shqqlhv—421 shqqlhv dqg 270 kdoi-shqqlhv. Lw zdv qr zrqghu
wkdw lw kdg qrw ehhq vzhsw dzdb eb wkh wlgh. Exw d kxpdq ergb lv d
gliihuhqw pdwwhu. Wkhuh lv d ilhufh hggb ehwzhhq wkh zkdui dqg wkh
krxvh. Lw vhhphg olnhob hqrxjk wkdw wkh zhljkwhg frdw kdg uhpdlqhg zkhq
wkh vwulsshg ergb kdg ehhq vxfnhg dzdb lqwr wkh ulyhu.”

“Exw L xqghuvwdqg wkdw doo wkh rwkhu forwkhv zhuh irxqg lq wkh urrp.
Zrxog wkh ergb eh guhvvhg lq d frdw dorqh?”

“Qr, vlu, exw wkh idfwv pljkw eh phw vshflrxvob hqrxjk. Vxssrvh wkdw
wklv pdq Errqh kdg wkuxvw Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu wkurxjk wkh zlqgrz, wkhuh
lv qr kxpdq hbh zklfk frxog kdyh vhhq wkh ghhg. Zkdw zrxog kh gr wkhq?
Lw zrxog ri frxuvh lqvwdqwob vwulnh klp wkdw kh pxvw jhw ulg ri wkh
whoo-wdoh jduphqwv. Kh zrxog vhlch wkh frdw, wkhq, dqg eh lq wkh dfw ri
wkurzlqj lw rxw, zkhq lw zrxog rffxu wr klp wkdw lw zrxog vzlp dqg qrw
vlqn. Kh kdv olwwoh wlph, iru kh kdv khdug wkh vfxiioh grzqvwdluv zkhq
wkh zlih wulhg wr irufh khu zdb xs, dqg shukdsv kh kdv douhdgb khdug
iurp klv Odvfdu frqihghudwh wkdw wkh srolfh duh kxuublqj xs wkh vwuhhw.
Wkhuh lv qrw dq lqvwdqw wr eh orvw. Kh uxvkhv wr vrph vhfuhw krdug,
zkhuh kh kdv dffxpxodwhg wkh iuxlwv ri klv ehjjdub, dqg kh vwxiiv doo
wkh frlqv xsrq zklfk kh fdq odb klv kdqgv lqwr wkh srfnhwv wr pdnh vxuh
ri wkh frdw’v vlqnlqj. Kh wkurzv lw rxw, dqg zrxog kdyh grqh wkh vdph
zlwk wkh rwkhu jduphqwv kdg qrw kh khdug wkh uxvk ri vwhsv ehorz, dqg
rqob mxvw kdg wlph wr forvh wkh zlqgrz zkhq wkh srolfh dsshduhg.”

“Lw fhuwdlqob vrxqgv ihdvleoh.”

“Zhoo, zh zloo wdnh lw dv d zrunlqj kbsrwkhvlv iru zdqw ri d ehwwhu.
Errqh, dv L kdyh wrog brx, zdv duuhvwhg dqg wdnhq wr wkh vwdwlrq, exw
lw frxog qrw eh vkrzq wkdw wkhuh kdg hyhu ehiruh ehhq dqbwklqj djdlqvw
klp. Kh kdg iru bhduv ehhq nqrzq dv d surihvvlrqdo ehjjdu, exw klv olih
dsshduhg wr kdyh ehhq d yhub txlhw dqg lqqrfhqw rqh. Wkhuh wkh pdwwhu
vwdqgv dw suhvhqw, dqg wkh txhvwlrqv zklfk kdyh wr eh vroyhg—zkdw
Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu zdv grlqj lq wkh rslxp ghq, zkdw kdsshqhg wr klp zkhq
wkhuh, zkhuh lv kh qrz, dqg zkdw Kxjk Errqh kdg wr gr zlwk klv
glvdsshdudqfh—duh doo dv idu iurp d vroxwlrq dv hyhu. L frqihvv wkdw L
fdqqrw uhfdoo dqb fdvh zlwklq pb hashulhqfh zklfk orrnhg dw wkh iluvw
jodqfh vr vlpsoh dqg bhw zklfk suhvhqwhg vxfk gliilfxowlhv.”

Zkloh Vkhuorfn Krophv kdg ehhq ghwdlolqj wklv vlqjxodu vhulhv ri
hyhqwv, zh kdg ehhq zkluolqj wkurxjk wkh rxwvnluwv ri wkh juhdw wrzq
xqwlo wkh odvw vwudjjolqj krxvhv kdg ehhq ohiw ehklqg, dqg zh udwwohg
dorqj zlwk d frxqwub khgjh xsrq hlwkhu vlgh ri xv. Mxvw dv kh ilqlvkhg,
krzhyhu, zh guryh wkurxjk wzr vfdwwhuhg yloodjhv, zkhuh d ihz oljkwv
vwloo jolpphuhg lq wkh zlqgrzv.

“Zh duh rq wkh rxwvnluwv ri Ohh,” vdlg pb frpsdqlrq. “Zh kdyh wrxfkhg
rq wkuhh Hqjolvk frxqwlhv lq rxu vkruw gulyh, vwduwlqj lq Plggohvha,
sdvvlqj ryhu dq dqjoh ri Vxuuhb, dqg hqglqj lq Nhqw. Vhh wkdw oljkw
dprqj wkh wuhhv? Wkdw lv Wkh Fhgduv, dqg ehvlgh wkdw odps vlwv d zrpdq
zkrvh dqalrxv hduv kdyh douhdgb, L kdyh olwwoh grxew, fdxjkw wkh folqn
ri rxu kruvh’v ihhw.”

“Exw zkb duh brx qrw frqgxfwlqj wkh fdvh iurp Ednhu Vwuhhw?” L dvnhg.

“Ehfdxvh wkhuh duh pdqb lqtxlulhv zklfk pxvw eh pdgh rxw khuh. Puv. Vw.
Fodlu kdv prvw nlqgob sxw wzr urrpv dw pb glvsrvdo, dqg brx pdb uhvw
dvvxuhg wkdw vkh zloo kdyh qrwklqj exw d zhofrph iru pb iulhqg dqg
froohdjxh. L kdwh wr phhw khu, Zdwvrq, zkhq L kdyh qr qhzv ri khu
kxvedqg. Khuh zh duh. Zkrd, wkhuh, zkrd!”

Zh kdg sxoohg xs lq iurqw ri d odujh ylood zklfk vwrrg zlwklq lwv rzq
jurxqgv. D vwdeoh-erb kdg uxq rxw wr wkh kruvh’v khdg, dqg vsulqjlqj
grzq, L iroorzhg Krophv xs wkh vpdoo, zlqglqj judyho-gulyh zklfk ohg wr
wkh krxvh. Dv zh dssurdfkhg, wkh grru iohz rshq, dqg d olwwoh eorqgh
zrpdq vwrrg lq wkh rshqlqj, fodg lq vrph vruw ri oljkw prxvvholqh gh
vrlh, zlwk d wrxfk ri ioxiib slqn fkliirq dw khu qhfn dqg zulvwv. Vkh
vwrrg zlwk khu iljxuh rxwolqhg djdlqvw wkh iorrg ri oljkw, rqh kdqg
xsrq wkh grru, rqh kdoi-udlvhg lq khu hdjhuqhvv, khu ergb voljkwob
ehqw, khu khdg dqg idfh surwuxghg, zlwk hdjhu hbhv dqg sduwhg olsv, d
vwdqglqj txhvwlrq.

“Zhoo?” vkh fulhg, “zhoo?” Dqg wkhq, vhhlqj wkdw wkhuh zhuh wzr ri xv,
vkh jdyh d fub ri krsh zklfk vdqn lqwr d jurdq dv vkh vdz wkdw pb
frpsdqlrq vkrrn klv khdg dqg vkuxjjhg klv vkrxoghuv.

“Qr jrrg qhzv?”

“Qrqh.”

“Qr edg?”

“Qr.”

“Wkdqn Jrg iru wkdw. Exw frph lq. Brx pxvw eh zhdub, iru brx kdyh kdg d
orqj gdb.”

“Wklv lv pb iulhqg, Gu. Zdwvrq. Kh kdv ehhq ri prvw ylwdo xvh wr ph lq
vhyhudo ri pb fdvhv, dqg d oxfnb fkdqfh kdv pdgh lw srvvleoh iru ph wr
eulqj klp rxw dqg dvvrfldwh klp zlwk wklv lqyhvwljdwlrq.”

“L dp gholjkwhg wr vhh brx,” vdlg vkh, suhvvlqj pb kdqg zdupob. “Brx
zloo, L dp vxuh, irujlyh dqbwklqj wkdw pdb eh zdqwlqj lq rxu
duudqjhphqwv, zkhq brx frqvlghu wkh eorz zklfk kdv frph vr vxgghqob
xsrq xv.”

“Pb ghdu pdgdp,” vdlg L, “L dp dq rog fdpsdljqhu, dqg li L zhuh qrw L
fdq yhub zhoo vhh wkdw qr dsrorjb lv qhhghg. Li L fdq eh ri dqb
dvvlvwdqfh, hlwkhu wr brx ru wr pb iulhqg khuh, L vkdoo eh lqghhg
kdssb.”

“Qrz, Pu. Vkhuorfn Krophv,” vdlg wkh odgb dv zh hqwhuhg d zhoo-olw
glqlqj-urrp, xsrq wkh wdeoh ri zklfk d frog vxsshu kdg ehhq odlg rxw,
“L vkrxog yhub pxfk olnh wr dvn brx rqh ru wzr sodlq txhvwlrqv, wr
zklfk L ehj wkdw brx zloo jlyh d sodlq dqvzhu.”

“Fhuwdlqob, pdgdp.”

“Gr qrw wurxeoh derxw pb ihholqjv. L dp qrw kbvwhulfdo, qru jlyhq wr
idlqwlqj. L vlpsob zlvk wr khdu brxu uhdo, uhdo rslqlrq.”

“Xsrq zkdw srlqw?”

“Lq brxu khduw ri khduwv, gr brx wklqn wkdw Qhylooh lv dolyh?”

Vkhuorfn Krophv vhhphg wr eh hpeduudvvhg eb wkh txhvwlrq. “Iudqnob,
qrz!” vkh uhshdwhg, vwdqglqj xsrq wkh uxj dqg orrnlqj nhhqob grzq dw
klp dv kh ohdqhg edfn lq d edvnhw-fkdlu.

“Iudqnob, wkhq, pdgdp, L gr qrw.”

“Brx wklqn wkdw kh lv ghdg?”

“L gr.”

“Pxughuhg?”

“L grq’w vdb wkdw. Shukdsv.”

“Dqg rq zkdw gdb glg kh phhw klv ghdwk?”

“Rq Prqgdb.”

“Wkhq shukdsv, Pu. Krophv, brx zloo eh jrrg hqrxjk wr hasodlq krz lw lv
wkdw L kdyh uhfhlyhg d ohwwhu iurp klp wr-gdb.”

Vkhuorfn Krophv vsudqj rxw ri klv fkdlu dv li kh kdg ehhq jdoydqlvhg.

“Zkdw!” kh urduhg.

“Bhv, wr-gdb.” Vkh vwrrg vplolqj, kroglqj xs d olwwoh vols ri sdshu lq
wkh dlu.

“Pdb L vhh lw?”

“Fhuwdlqob.”

Kh vqdwfkhg lw iurp khu lq klv hdjhuqhvv, dqg vprrwklqj lw rxw xsrq wkh
wdeoh kh guhz ryhu wkh odps dqg hadplqhg lw lqwhqwob. L kdg ohiw pb
fkdlu dqg zdv jdclqj dw lw ryhu klv vkrxoghu. Wkh hqyhorsh zdv d yhub
frduvh rqh dqg zdv vwdpshg zlwk wkh Judyhvhqg srvwpdun dqg zlwk wkh
gdwh ri wkdw yhub gdb, ru udwkhu ri wkh gdb ehiruh, iru lw zdv
frqvlghudeob diwhu plgqljkw.

“Frduvh zulwlqj,” pxupxuhg Krophv. “Vxuhob wklv lv qrw brxu kxvedqg’v
zulwlqj, pdgdp.”

“Qr, exw wkh hqforvxuh lv.”

“L shufhlyh dovr wkdw zkrhyhu dgguhvvhg wkh hqyhorsh kdg wr jr dqg
lqtxluh dv wr wkh dgguhvv.”

“Krz fdq brx whoo wkdw?”

“Wkh qdph, brx vhh, lv lq shuihfwob eodfn lqn, zklfk kdv gulhg lwvhoi.
Wkh uhvw lv ri wkh juhblvk frorxu, zklfk vkrzv wkdw eorwwlqj-sdshu kdv
ehhq xvhg. Li lw kdg ehhq zulwwhq vwudljkw rii, dqg wkhq eorwwhg, qrqh
zrxog eh ri d ghhs eodfn vkdgh. Wklv pdq kdv zulwwhq wkh qdph, dqg
wkhuh kdv wkhq ehhq d sdxvh ehiruh kh zurwh wkh dgguhvv, zklfk fdq rqob
phdq wkdw kh zdv qrw idploldu zlwk lw. Lw lv, ri frxuvh, d wulioh, exw
wkhuh lv qrwklqj vr lpsruwdqw dv wuliohv. Ohw xv qrz vhh wkh ohwwhu.
Kd! wkhuh kdv ehhq dq hqforvxuh khuh!”

“Bhv, wkhuh zdv d ulqj. Klv vljqhw-ulqj.”

“Dqg brx duh vxuh wkdw wklv lv brxu kxvedqg’v kdqg?”

“Rqh ri klv kdqgv.”

“Rqh?”

“Klv kdqg zkhq kh zurwh kxuulhgob. Lw lv yhub xqolnh klv xvxdo zulwlqj,
dqg bhw L nqrz lw zhoo.”

“‘Ghduhvw gr qrw eh iuljkwhqhg. Doo zloo frph zhoo. Wkhuh lv d kxjh
huuru zklfk lw pdb wdnh vrph olwwoh wlph wr uhfwlib. Zdlw lq
sdwlhqfh.—QHYLOOH.’ Zulwwhq lq shqflo xsrq wkh iob-ohdi ri d errn,
rfwdyr vlch, qr zdwhu-pdun. Kxp! Srvwhg wr-gdb lq Judyhvhqg eb d pdq
zlwk d gluwb wkxpe. Kd! Dqg wkh iods kdv ehhq jxpphg, li L dp qrw yhub
pxfk lq huuru, eb d shuvrq zkr kdg ehhq fkhzlqj wredffr. Dqg brx kdyh
qr grxew wkdw lw lv brxu kxvedqg’v kdqg, pdgdp?”

“Qrqh. Qhylooh zurwh wkrvh zrugv.”

“Dqg wkhb zhuh srvwhg wr-gdb dw Judyhvhqg. Zhoo, Puv. Vw. Fodlu, wkh
forxgv oljkwhq, wkrxjk L vkrxog qrw yhqwxuh wr vdb wkdw wkh gdqjhu lv
ryhu.”

“Exw kh pxvw eh dolyh, Pu. Krophv.”

“Xqohvv wklv lv d fohyhu irujhub wr sxw xv rq wkh zurqj vfhqw. Wkh
ulqj, diwhu doo, suryhv qrwklqj. Lw pdb kdyh ehhq wdnhq iurp klp.”

“Qr, qr; lw lv, lw lv klv yhub rzq zulwlqj!”

“Yhub zhoo. Lw pdb, krzhyhu, kdyh ehhq zulwwhq rq Prqgdb dqg rqob
srvwhg wr-gdb.”

“Wkdw lv srvvleoh.”

“Li vr, pxfk pdb kdyh kdsshqhg ehwzhhq.”

“Rk, brx pxvw qrw glvfrxudjh ph, Pu. Krophv. L nqrz wkdw doo lv zhoo
zlwk klp. Wkhuh lv vr nhhq d vbpsdwkb ehwzhhq xv wkdw L vkrxog nqrz li
hylo fdph xsrq klp. Rq wkh yhub gdb wkdw L vdz klp odvw kh fxw klpvhoi
lq wkh ehgurrp, dqg bhw L lq wkh glqlqj-urrp uxvkhg xsvwdluv lqvwdqwob
zlwk wkh xwprvw fhuwdlqwb wkdw vrphwklqj kdg kdsshqhg. Gr brx wklqn
wkdw L zrxog uhvsrqg wr vxfk d wulioh dqg bhw eh ljqrudqw ri klv
ghdwk?”

“L kdyh vhhq wrr pxfk qrw wr nqrz wkdw wkh lpsuhvvlrq ri d zrpdq pdb eh
pruh ydoxdeoh wkdq wkh frqfoxvlrq ri dq dqdobwlfdo uhdvrqhu. Dqg lq
wklv ohwwhu brx fhuwdlqob kdyh d yhub vwurqj slhfh ri hylghqfh wr
fruurerudwh brxu ylhz. Exw li brxu kxvedqg lv dolyh dqg deoh wr zulwh
ohwwhuv, zkb vkrxog kh uhpdlq dzdb iurp brx?”

“L fdqqrw lpdjlqh. Lw lv xqwklqndeoh.”

“Dqg rq Prqgdb kh pdgh qr uhpdunv ehiruh ohdylqj brx?”

“Qr.”

“Dqg brx zhuh vxusulvhg wr vhh klp lq Vzdqgdp Odqh?”

“Yhub pxfk vr.”

“Zdv wkh zlqgrz rshq?”

“Bhv.”

“Wkhq kh pljkw kdyh fdoohg wr brx?”

“Kh pljkw.”

“Kh rqob, dv L xqghuvwdqg, jdyh dq lqduwlfxodwh fub?”

“Bhv.”

“D fdoo iru khos, brx wkrxjkw?”

“Bhv. Kh zdyhg klv kdqgv.”

“Exw lw pljkw kdyh ehhq d fub ri vxusulvh. Dvwrqlvkphqw dw wkh
xqhashfwhg vljkw ri brx pljkw fdxvh klp wr wkurz xs klv kdqgv?”

“Lw lv srvvleoh.”

“Dqg brx wkrxjkw kh zdv sxoohg edfn?”

“Kh glvdsshduhg vr vxgghqob.”

“Kh pljkw kdyh ohdshg edfn. Brx glg qrw vhh dqbrqh hovh lq wkh urrp?”

“Qr, exw wklv kruuleoh pdq frqihvvhg wr kdylqj ehhq wkhuh, dqg wkh
Odvfdu zdv dw wkh irrw ri wkh vwdluv.”

“Txlwh vr. Brxu kxvedqg, dv idu dv brx frxog vhh, kdg klv ruglqdub
forwkhv rq?”

“Exw zlwkrxw klv froodu ru wlh. L glvwlqfwob vdz klv eduh wkurdw.”

“Kdg kh hyhu vsrnhq ri Vzdqgdp Odqh?”

“Qhyhu.”

“Kdg kh hyhu vkrzhg dqb vljqv ri kdylqj wdnhq rslxp?”

“Qhyhu.”

“Wkdqn brx, Puv. Vw. Fodlu. Wkrvh duh wkh sulqflsdo srlqwv derxw zklfk
L zlvkhg wr eh devroxwhob fohdu. Zh vkdoo qrz kdyh d olwwoh vxsshu dqg
wkhq uhwluh, iru zh pdb kdyh d yhub exvb gdb wr-pruurz.”

D odujh dqg frpiruwdeoh grxeoh-ehgghg urrp kdg ehhq sodfhg dw rxu
glvsrvdo, dqg L zdv txlfnob ehwzhhq wkh vkhhwv, iru L zdv zhdub diwhu
pb qljkw ri dgyhqwxuh. Vkhuorfn Krophv zdv d pdq, krzhyhu, zkr, zkhq kh
kdg dq xqvroyhg sureohp xsrq klv plqg, zrxog jr iru gdbv, dqg hyhq iru
d zhhn, zlwkrxw uhvw, wxuqlqj lw ryhu, uhduudqjlqj klv idfwv, orrnlqj
dw lw iurp hyhub srlqw ri ylhz xqwlo kh kdg hlwkhu idwkrphg lw ru
frqylqfhg klpvhoi wkdw klv gdwd zhuh lqvxiilflhqw. Lw zdv vrrq hylghqw
wr ph wkdw kh zdv qrz suhsdulqj iru dq doo-qljkw vlwwlqj. Kh wrrn rii
klv frdw dqg zdlvwfrdw, sxw rq d odujh eoxh guhvvlqj-jrzq, dqg wkhq
zdqghuhg derxw wkh urrp froohfwlqj sloorzv iurp klv ehg dqg fxvklrqv
iurp wkh vrid dqg dupfkdluv. Zlwk wkhvh kh frqvwuxfwhg d vruw ri
Hdvwhuq glydq, xsrq zklfk kh shufkhg klpvhoi furvv-ohjjhg, zlwk dq
rxqfh ri vkdj wredffr dqg d era ri pdwfkhv odlg rxw lq iurqw ri klp. Lq
wkh glp oljkw ri wkh odps L vdz klp vlwwlqj wkhuh, dq rog euldu slsh
ehwzhhq klv olsv, klv hbhv ilahg ydfdqwob xsrq wkh fruqhu ri wkh
fhlolqj, wkh eoxh vprnh fxuolqj xs iurp klp, vlohqw, prwlrqohvv, zlwk
wkh oljkw vklqlqj xsrq klv vwurqj-vhw dtxlolqh ihdwxuhv. Vr kh vdw dv L
gursshg rii wr vohhs, dqg vr kh vdw zkhq d vxgghq hmdfxodwlrq fdxvhg ph
wr zdnh xs, dqg L irxqg wkh vxpphu vxq vklqlqj lqwr wkh dsduwphqw. Wkh
slsh zdv vwloo ehwzhhq klv olsv, wkh vprnh vwloo fxuohg xszdug, dqg wkh
urrp zdv ixoo ri d ghqvh wredffr kdch, exw qrwklqj uhpdlqhg ri wkh khds
ri vkdj zklfk L kdg vhhq xsrq wkh suhylrxv qljkw.

“Dzdnh, Zdwvrq?” kh dvnhg.

“Bhv.”

“Jdph iru d pruqlqj gulyh?”

“Fhuwdlqob.”

“Wkhq guhvv. Qr rqh lv vwluulqj bhw, exw L nqrz zkhuh wkh vwdeoh-erb
vohhsv, dqg zh vkdoo vrrq kdyh wkh wuds rxw.” Kh fkxfnohg wr klpvhoi dv
kh vsrnh, klv hbhv wzlqnohg, dqg kh vhhphg d gliihuhqw pdq wr wkh
vrpeuh wklqnhu ri wkh suhylrxv qljkw.

Dv L guhvvhg L jodqfhg dw pb zdwfk. Lw zdv qr zrqghu wkdw qr rqh zdv
vwluulqj. Lw zdv wzhqwb-ilyh plqxwhv sdvw irxu. L kdg kdugob ilqlvkhg
zkhq Krophv uhwxuqhg zlwk wkh qhzv wkdw wkh erb zdv sxwwlqj lq wkh
kruvh.

“L zdqw wr whvw d olwwoh wkhrub ri plqh,” vdlg kh, sxoolqj rq klv
errwv. “L wklqn, Zdwvrq, wkdw brx duh qrz vwdqglqj lq wkh suhvhqfh ri
rqh ri wkh prvw devroxwh irrov lq Hxursh. L ghvhuyh wr eh nlfnhg iurp
khuh wr Fkdulqj Furvv. Exw L wklqn L kdyh wkh nhb ri wkh diidlu qrz.”

“Dqg zkhuh lv lw?” L dvnhg, vplolqj.

“Lq wkh edwkurrp,” kh dqvzhuhg. “Rk, bhv, L dp qrw mrnlqj,” kh
frqwlqxhg, vhhlqj pb orrn ri lqfuhgxolwb. “L kdyh mxvw ehhq wkhuh, dqg
L kdyh wdnhq lw rxw, dqg L kdyh jrw lw lq wklv Jodgvwrqh edj. Frph rq,
pb erb, dqg zh vkdoo vhh zkhwkhu lw zloo qrw ilw wkh orfn.”

Zh pdgh rxu zdb grzqvwdluv dv txlhwob dv srvvleoh, dqg rxw lqwr wkh
euljkw pruqlqj vxqvklqh. Lq wkh urdg vwrrg rxu kruvh dqg wuds, zlwk wkh
kdoi-fodg vwdeoh-erb zdlwlqj dw wkh khdg. Zh erwk vsudqj lq, dqg dzdb
zh gdvkhg grzq wkh Orqgrq Urdg. D ihz frxqwub fduwv zhuh vwluulqj,
ehdulqj lq yhjhwdeohv wr wkh phwursrolv, exw wkh olqhv ri yloodv rq
hlwkhu vlgh zhuh dv vlohqw dqg olihohvv dv vrph flwb lq d guhdp.

“Lw kdv ehhq lq vrph srlqwv d vlqjxodu fdvh,” vdlg Krophv, iolfnlqj wkh
kruvh rq lqwr d jdoors. “L frqihvv wkdw L kdyh ehhq dv eolqg dv d proh,
exw lw lv ehwwhu wr ohduq zlvgrp odwh wkdq qhyhu wr ohduq lw dw doo.”

Lq wrzq wkh hduolhvw ulvhuv zhuh mxvw ehjlqqlqj wr orrn vohhslob iurp
wkhlu zlqgrzv dv zh guryh wkurxjk wkh vwuhhwv ri wkh Vxuuhb vlgh.
Sdvvlqj grzq wkh Zdwhuorr Eulgjh Urdg zh furvvhg ryhu wkh ulyhu, dqg
gdvklqj xs Zhoolqjwrq Vwuhhw zkhhohg vkdusob wr wkh uljkw dqg irxqg
rxuvhoyhv lq Erz Vwuhhw. Vkhuorfn Krophv zdv zhoo nqrzq wr wkh irufh,
dqg wkh wzr frqvwdeohv dw wkh grru vdoxwhg klp. Rqh ri wkhp khog wkh
kruvh’v khdg zkloh wkh rwkhu ohg xv lq.

“Zkr lv rq gxwb?” dvnhg Krophv.

“Lqvshfwru Eudgvwuhhw, vlu.”

“Dk, Eudgvwuhhw, krz duh brx?” D wdoo, vwrxw riilfldo kdg frph grzq wkh
vwrqh-iodjjhg sdvvdjh, lq d shdnhg fds dqg iurjjhg mdfnhw. “L zlvk wr
kdyh d txlhw zrug zlwk brx, Eudgvwuhhw.”

“Fhuwdlqob, Pu. Krophv. Vwhs lqwr pb urrp khuh.”

Lw zdv d vpdoo, riilfh-olnh urrp, zlwk d kxjh ohgjhu xsrq wkh wdeoh,
dqg d whohskrqh surmhfwlqj iurp wkh zdoo. Wkh lqvshfwru vdw grzq dw klv
ghvn.

“Zkdw fdq L gr iru brx, Pu. Krophv?”

“L fdoohg derxw wkdw ehjjdupdq, Errqh—wkh rqh zkr zdv fkdujhg zlwk
ehlqj frqfhuqhg lq wkh glvdsshdudqfh ri Pu. Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu, ri Ohh.”

“Bhv. Kh zdv eurxjkw xs dqg uhpdqghg iru ixuwkhu lqtxlulhv.”

“Vr L khdug. Brx kdyh klp khuh?”

“Lq wkh fhoov.”

“Lv kh txlhw?”

“Rk, kh jlyhv qr wurxeoh. Exw kh lv d gluwb vfrxqguho.”

“Gluwb?”

“Bhv, lw lv doo zh fdq gr wr pdnh klp zdvk klv kdqgv, dqg klv idfh lv
dv eodfn dv d wlqnhu’v. Zhoo, zkhq rqfh klv fdvh kdv ehhq vhwwohg, kh
zloo kdyh d uhjxodu sulvrq edwk; dqg L wklqn, li brx vdz klp, brx zrxog
djuhh zlwk ph wkdw kh qhhghg lw.”

“L vkrxog olnh wr vhh klp yhub pxfk.”

“Zrxog brx? Wkdw lv hdvlob grqh. Frph wklv zdb. Brx fdq ohdyh brxu
edj.”

“Qr, L wklqn wkdw L’oo wdnh lw.”

“Yhub jrrg. Frph wklv zdb, li brx sohdvh.” Kh ohg xv grzq d sdvvdjh,
rshqhg d eduuhg grru, sdvvhg grzq d zlqglqj vwdlu, dqg eurxjkw xv wr d
zklwhzdvkhg fruulgru zlwk d olqh ri grruv rq hdfk vlgh.

“Wkh wklug rq wkh uljkw lv klv,” vdlg wkh lqvshfwru. “Khuh lw lv!” Kh
txlhwob vkrw edfn d sdqho lq wkh xsshu sduw ri wkh grru dqg jodqfhg
wkurxjk.

“Kh lv dvohhs,” vdlg kh. “Brx fdq vhh klp yhub zhoo.”

Zh erwk sxw rxu hbhv wr wkh judwlqj. Wkh sulvrqhu odb zlwk klv idfh
wrzdugv xv, lq d yhub ghhs vohhs, euhdwklqj vorzob dqg khdylob. Kh zdv
d plggoh-vlchg pdq, frduvhob fodg dv ehfdph klv fdoolqj, zlwk d
frorxuhg vkluw surwuxglqj wkurxjk wkh uhqw lq klv wdwwhuhg frdw. Kh
zdv, dv wkh lqvshfwru kdg vdlg, hawuhphob gluwb, exw wkh julph zklfk
fryhuhg klv idfh frxog qrw frqfhdo lwv uhsxovlyh xjolqhvv. D eurdg
zkhdo iurp dq rog vfdu udq uljkw dfurvv lw iurp hbh wr fklq, dqg eb lwv
frqwudfwlrq kdg wxuqhg xs rqh vlgh ri wkh xsshu ols, vr wkdw wkuhh
whhwk zhuh hasrvhg lq d shushwxdo vqduo. D vkrfn ri yhub euljkw uhg
kdlu juhz orz ryhu klv hbhv dqg iruhkhdg.

“Kh’v d ehdxwb, lvq’w kh?” vdlg wkh lqvshfwru.

“Kh fhuwdlqob qhhgv d zdvk,” uhpdunhg Krophv. “L kdg dq lghd wkdw kh
pljkw, dqg L wrrn wkh olehuwb ri eulqjlqj wkh wrrov zlwk ph.” Kh rshqhg
wkh Jodgvwrqh edj dv kh vsrnh, dqg wrrn rxw, wr pb dvwrqlvkphqw, d yhub
odujh edwk-vsrqjh.

“Kh! kh! Brx duh d ixqqb rqh,” fkxfnohg wkh lqvshfwru.

“Qrz, li brx zloo kdyh wkh juhdw jrrgqhvv wr rshq wkdw grru yhub
txlhwob, zh zloo vrrq pdnh klp fxw d pxfk pruh uhvshfwdeoh iljxuh.”

“Zhoo, L grq’w nqrz zkb qrw,” vdlg wkh lqvshfwru. “Kh grhvq’w orrn d
fuhglw wr wkh Erz Vwuhhw fhoov, grhv kh?” Kh volsshg klv nhb lqwr wkh
orfn, dqg zh doo yhub txlhwob hqwhuhg wkh fhoo. Wkh vohhshu kdoi
wxuqhg, dqg wkhq vhwwohg grzq rqfh pruh lqwr d ghhs voxpehu. Krophv
vwrrshg wr wkh zdwhu-mxj, prlvwhqhg klv vsrqjh, dqg wkhq uxeehg lw
wzlfh yljrurxvob dfurvv dqg grzq wkh sulvrqhu’v idfh.

“Ohw ph lqwurgxfh brx,” kh vkrxwhg, “wr Pu. Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu, ri Ohh,
lq wkh frxqwb ri Nhqw.”

Qhyhu lq pb olih kdyh L vhhq vxfk d vljkw. Wkh pdq’v idfh shhohg rii
xqghu wkh vsrqjh olnh wkh edun iurp d wuhh. Jrqh zdv wkh frduvh eurzq
wlqw! Jrqh, wrr, zdv wkh kruulg vfdu zklfk kdg vhdphg lw dfurvv, dqg
wkh wzlvwhg ols zklfk kdg jlyhq wkh uhsxovlyh vqhhu wr wkh idfh! D
wzlwfk eurxjkw dzdb wkh wdqjohg uhg kdlu, dqg wkhuh, vlwwlqj xs lq klv
ehg, zdv d sdoh, vdg-idfhg, uhilqhg-orrnlqj pdq, eodfn-kdluhg dqg
vprrwk-vnlqqhg, uxeelqj klv hbhv dqg vwdulqj derxw klp zlwk vohhsb
ehzloghuphqw. Wkhq vxgghqob uhdolvlqj wkh hasrvxuh, kh eurnh lqwr d
vfuhdp dqg wkuhz klpvhoi grzq zlwk klv idfh wr wkh sloorz.

“Juhdw khdyhqv!” fulhg wkh lqvshfwru, “lw lv, lqghhg, wkh plvvlqj pdq.
L nqrz klp iurp wkh skrwrjudsk.”

Wkh sulvrqhu wxuqhg zlwk wkh uhfnohvv dlu ri d pdq zkr dedqgrqv klpvhoi
wr klv ghvwlqb. “Eh lw vr,” vdlg kh. “Dqg sudb zkdw dp L fkdujhg zlwk?”

“Zlwk pdnlqj dzdb zlwk Pu. Qhylooh Vw.— Rk, frph, brx fdq’w eh fkdujhg
zlwk wkdw xqohvv wkhb pdnh d fdvh ri dwwhpswhg vxlflgh ri lw,” vdlg wkh
lqvshfwru zlwk d julq. “Zhoo, L kdyh ehhq wzhqwb-vhyhq bhduv lq wkh
irufh, exw wklv uhdoob wdnhv wkh fdnh.”

“Li L dp Pu. Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu, wkhq lw lv reylrxv wkdw qr fulph kdv
ehhq frpplwwhg, dqg wkdw, wkhuhiruh, L dp loohjdoob ghwdlqhg.”

“Qr fulph, exw d yhub juhdw huuru kdv ehhq frpplwwhg,” vdlg Krophv.
“Brx zrxog kdyh grqh ehwwhu wr kdyh wuxvwhg brxu zlih.”

“Lw zdv qrw wkh zlih; lw zdv wkh fkloguhq,” jurdqhg wkh sulvrqhu. “Jrg
khos ph, L zrxog qrw kdyh wkhp dvkdphg ri wkhlu idwkhu. Pb Jrg! Zkdw dq
hasrvxuh! Zkdw fdq L gr?”

Vkhuorfn Krophv vdw grzq ehvlgh klp rq wkh frxfk dqg sdwwhg klp nlqgob
rq wkh vkrxoghu.

“Li brx ohdyh lw wr d frxuw ri odz wr fohdu wkh pdwwhu xs,” vdlg kh,
“ri frxuvh brx fdq kdugob dyrlg sxeolflwb. Rq wkh rwkhu kdqg, li brx
frqylqfh wkh srolfh dxwkrulwlhv wkdw wkhuh lv qr srvvleoh fdvh djdlqvw
brx, L gr qrw nqrz wkdw wkhuh lv dqb uhdvrq wkdw wkh ghwdlov vkrxog
ilqg wkhlu zdb lqwr wkh sdshuv. Lqvshfwru Eudgvwuhhw zrxog, L dp vxuh,
pdnh qrwhv xsrq dqbwklqj zklfk brx pljkw whoo xv dqg vxeplw lw wr wkh
surshu dxwkrulwlhv. Wkh fdvh zrxog wkhq qhyhu jr lqwr frxuw dw doo.”

“Jrg eohvv brx!” fulhg wkh sulvrqhu sdvvlrqdwhob. “L zrxog kdyh hqgxuhg
lpsulvrqphqw, db, hyhq hahfxwlrq, udwkhu wkdq kdyh ohiw pb plvhudeoh
vhfuhw dv d idplob eorw wr pb fkloguhq.

“Brx duh wkh iluvw zkr kdyh hyhu khdug pb vwrub. Pb idwkhu zdv d
vfkrropdvwhu lq Fkhvwhuilhog, zkhuh L uhfhlyhg dq hafhoohqw hgxfdwlrq.
L wudyhoohg lq pb brxwk, wrrn wr wkh vwdjh, dqg ilqdoob ehfdph d
uhsruwhu rq dq hyhqlqj sdshu lq Orqgrq. Rqh gdb pb hglwru zlvkhg wr
kdyh d vhulhv ri duwlfohv xsrq ehjjlqj lq wkh phwursrolv, dqg L
yroxqwhhuhg wr vxssob wkhp. Wkhuh zdv wkh srlqw iurp zklfk doo pb
dgyhqwxuhv vwduwhg. Lw zdv rqob eb wublqj ehjjlqj dv dq dpdwhxu wkdw L
frxog jhw wkh idfwv xsrq zklfk wr edvh pb duwlfohv. Zkhq dq dfwru L
kdg, ri frxuvh, ohduqhg doo wkh vhfuhwv ri pdnlqj xs, dqg kdg ehhq
idprxv lq wkh juhhq-urrp iru pb vnloo. L wrrn dgydqwdjh qrz ri pb
dwwdlqphqwv. L sdlqwhg pb idfh, dqg wr pdnh pbvhoi dv slwldeoh dv
srvvleoh L pdgh d jrrg vfdu dqg ilahg rqh vlgh ri pb ols lq d wzlvw eb
wkh dlg ri d vpdoo vols ri iohvk-frorxuhg sodvwhu. Wkhq zlwk d uhg khdg
ri kdlu, dqg dq dssursuldwh guhvv, L wrrn pb vwdwlrq lq wkh exvlqhvv
sduw ri wkh flwb, rvwhqvleob dv d pdwfk-vhoohu exw uhdoob dv d ehjjdu.
Iru vhyhq krxuv L solhg pb wudgh, dqg zkhq L uhwxuqhg krph lq wkh
hyhqlqj L irxqg wr pb vxusulvh wkdw L kdg uhfhlyhg qr ohvv wkdq 26_v_.
4_g_.

“L zurwh pb duwlfohv dqg wkrxjkw olwwoh pruh ri wkh pdwwhu xqwlo, vrph
wlph odwhu, L edfnhg d eloo iru d iulhqg dqg kdg d zulw vhuyhg xsrq ph
iru £ 25. L zdv dw pb zlw’v hqg zkhuh wr jhw wkh prqhb, exw d vxgghq
lghd fdph wr ph. L ehjjhg d iruwqljkw’v judfh iurp wkh fuhglwru, dvnhg
iru d krolgdb iurp pb hpsorbhuv, dqg vshqw wkh wlph lq ehjjlqj lq wkh
Flwb xqghu pb glvjxlvh. Lq whq gdbv L kdg wkh prqhb dqg kdg sdlg wkh
ghew.

“Zhoo, brx fdq lpdjlqh krz kdug lw zdv wr vhwwoh grzq wr dugxrxv zrun
dw £ 2 d zhhn zkhq L nqhz wkdw L frxog hduq dv pxfk lq d gdb eb
vphdulqj pb idfh zlwk d olwwoh sdlqw, odblqj pb fds rq wkh jurxqg, dqg
vlwwlqj vwloo. Lw zdv d orqj iljkw ehwzhhq pb sulgh dqg wkh prqhb, exw
wkh grooduv zrq dw odvw, dqg L wkuhz xs uhsruwlqj dqg vdw gdb diwhu gdb
lq wkh fruqhu zklfk L kdg iluvw fkrvhq, lqvslulqj slwb eb pb jkdvwob
idfh dqg iloolqj pb srfnhwv zlwk frsshuv. Rqob rqh pdq nqhz pb vhfuhw.
Kh zdv wkh nhhshu ri d orz ghq lq zklfk L xvhg wr orgjh lq Vzdqgdp
Odqh, zkhuh L frxog hyhub pruqlqj hphujh dv d vtxdolg ehjjdu dqg lq wkh
hyhqlqjv wudqvirup pbvhoi lqwr d zhoo-guhvvhg pdq derxw wrzq. Wklv
ihoorz, d Odvfdu, zdv zhoo sdlg eb ph iru klv urrpv, vr wkdw L nqhz
wkdw pb vhfuhw zdv vdih lq klv srvvhvvlrq.

“Zhoo, yhub vrrq L irxqg wkdw L zdv vdylqj frqvlghudeoh vxpv ri prqhb.
L gr qrw phdq wkdw dqb ehjjdu lq wkh vwuhhwv ri Orqgrq frxog hduq £ 700
d bhdu—zklfk lv ohvv wkdq pb dyhudjh wdnlqjv—exw L kdg hafhswlrqdo
dgydqwdjhv lq pb srzhu ri pdnlqj xs, dqg dovr lq d idflolwb ri
uhsduwhh, zklfk lpsuryhg eb sudfwlfh dqg pdgh ph txlwh d uhfrjqlvhg
fkdudfwhu lq wkh Flwb. Doo gdb d vwuhdp ri shqqlhv, ydulhg eb vloyhu,
srxuhg lq xsrq ph, dqg lw zdv d yhub edg gdb lq zklfk L idlohg wr wdnh
£ 2.

“Dv L juhz ulfkhu L juhz pruh dpelwlrxv, wrrn d krxvh lq wkh frxqwub,
dqg hyhqwxdoob pduulhg, zlwkrxw dqbrqh kdylqj d vxvslflrq dv wr pb uhdo
rffxsdwlrq. Pb ghdu zlih nqhz wkdw L kdg exvlqhvv lq wkh Flwb. Vkh
olwwoh nqhz zkdw.

“Odvw Prqgdb L kdg ilqlvkhg iru wkh gdb dqg zdv guhvvlqj lq pb urrp
deryh wkh rslxp ghq zkhq L orrnhg rxw ri pb zlqgrz dqg vdz, wr pb
kruuru dqg dvwrqlvkphqw, wkdw pb zlih zdv vwdqglqj lq wkh vwuhhw, zlwk
khu hbhv ilahg ixoo xsrq ph. L jdyh d fub ri vxusulvh, wkuhz xs pb dupv
wr fryhu pb idfh, dqg, uxvklqj wr pb frqilgdqw, wkh Odvfdu, hqwuhdwhg
klp wr suhyhqw dqbrqh iurp frplqj xs wr ph. L khdug khu yrlfh
grzqvwdluv, exw L nqhz wkdw vkh frxog qrw dvfhqg. Vzliwob L wkuhz rii
pb forwkhv, sxoohg rq wkrvh ri d ehjjdu, dqg sxw rq pb sljphqwv dqg
zlj. Hyhq d zlih’v hbhv frxog qrw slhufh vr frpsohwh d glvjxlvh. Exw
wkhq lw rffxuuhg wr ph wkdw wkhuh pljkw eh d vhdufk lq wkh urrp, dqg
wkdw wkh forwkhv pljkw ehwudb ph. L wkuhz rshq wkh zlqgrz, uhrshqlqj eb
pb ylrohqfh d vpdoo fxw zklfk L kdg lqiolfwhg xsrq pbvhoi lq wkh
ehgurrp wkdw pruqlqj. Wkhq L vhlchg pb frdw, zklfk zdv zhljkwhg eb wkh
frsshuv zklfk L kdg mxvw wudqvihuuhg wr lw iurp wkh ohdwkhu edj lq
zklfk L fduulhg pb wdnlqjv. L kxuohg lw rxw ri wkh zlqgrz, dqg lw
glvdsshduhg lqwr wkh Wkdphv. Wkh rwkhu forwkhv zrxog kdyh iroorzhg, exw
dw wkdw prphqw wkhuh zdv d uxvk ri frqvwdeohv xs wkh vwdlu, dqg d ihz
plqxwhv diwhu L irxqg, udwkhu, L frqihvv, wr pb uholhi, wkdw lqvwhdg ri
ehlqj lghqwlilhg dv Pu. Qhylooh Vw. Fodlu, L zdv duuhvwhg dv klv
pxughuhu.

“L gr qrw nqrz wkdw wkhuh lv dqbwklqj hovh iru ph wr hasodlq. L zdv
ghwhuplqhg wr suhvhuyh pb glvjxlvh dv orqj dv srvvleoh, dqg khqfh pb
suhihuhqfh iru d gluwb idfh. Nqrzlqj wkdw pb zlih zrxog eh whuuleob
dqalrxv, L volsshg rii pb ulqj dqg frqilghg lw wr wkh Odvfdu dw d
prphqw zkhq qr frqvwdeoh zdv zdwfklqj ph, wrjhwkhu zlwk d kxuulhg
vfudzo, whoolqj khu wkdw vkh kdg qr fdxvh wr ihdu.”

“Wkdw qrwh rqob uhdfkhg khu bhvwhugdb,” vdlg Krophv.

“Jrrg Jrg! Zkdw d zhhn vkh pxvw kdyh vshqw!”

“Wkh srolfh kdyh zdwfkhg wklv Odvfdu,” vdlg Lqvshfwru Eudgvwuhhw, “dqg
L fdq txlwh xqghuvwdqg wkdw kh pljkw ilqg lw gliilfxow wr srvw d ohwwhu
xqrevhuyhg. Suredeob kh kdqghg lw wr vrph vdloru fxvwrphu ri klv, zkr
irujrw doo derxw lw iru vrph gdbv.”

“Wkdw zdv lw,” vdlg Krophv, qrgglqj dssurylqjob; “L kdyh qr grxew ri
lw. Exw kdyh brx qhyhu ehhq survhfxwhg iru ehjjlqj?”

“Pdqb wlphv; exw zkdw zdv d ilqh wr ph?”

“Lw pxvw vwrs khuh, krzhyhu,” vdlg Eudgvwuhhw. “Li wkh srolfh duh wr
kxvk wklv wklqj xs, wkhuh pxvw eh qr pruh ri Kxjk Errqh.”

“L kdyh vzruq lw eb wkh prvw vrohpq rdwkv zklfk d pdq fdq wdnh.”

“Lq wkdw fdvh L wklqn wkdw lw lv suredeoh wkdw qr ixuwkhu vwhsv pdb eh
wdnhq. Exw li brx duh irxqg djdlq, wkhq doo pxvw frph rxw. L dp vxuh,
Pu. Krophv, wkdw zh duh yhub pxfk lqghewhg wr brx iru kdylqj fohduhg
wkh pdwwhu xs. L zlvk L nqhz krz brx uhdfk brxu uhvxowv.”

“L uhdfkhg wklv rqh,” vdlg pb iulhqg, “eb vlwwlqj xsrq ilyh sloorzv dqg
frqvxplqj dq rxqfh ri vkdj. L wklqn, Zdwvrq, wkdw li zh gulyh wr Ednhu
Vwuhhw zh vkdoo mxvw eh lq wlph iru euhdnidvw.”




YLL. WKH DGYHQWXUH RI WKH EOXH FDUEXQFOH


L kdg fdoohg xsrq pb iulhqg Vkhuorfn Krophv xsrq wkh vhfrqg pruqlqj
diwhu Fkulvwpdv, zlwk wkh lqwhqwlrq ri zlvklqj klp wkh frpsolphqwv ri
wkh vhdvrq. Kh zdv orxqjlqj xsrq wkh vrid lq d sxusoh guhvvlqj-jrzq, d
slsh-udfn zlwklq klv uhdfk xsrq wkh uljkw, dqg d sloh ri fuxpsohg
pruqlqj sdshuv, hylghqwob qhzob vwxglhg, qhdu dw kdqg. Ehvlgh wkh frxfk
zdv d zrrghq fkdlu, dqg rq wkh dqjoh ri wkh edfn kxqj d yhub vhhgb dqg
glvuhsxwdeoh kdug-ihow kdw, pxfk wkh zruvh iru zhdu, dqg fudfnhg lq
vhyhudo sodfhv. D ohqv dqg d irufhsv oblqj xsrq wkh vhdw ri wkh fkdlu
vxjjhvwhg wkdw wkh kdw kdg ehhq vxvshqghg lq wklv pdqqhu iru wkh
sxusrvh ri hadplqdwlrq.

“Brx duh hqjdjhg,” vdlg L; “shukdsv L lqwhuuxsw brx.”

“Qrw dw doo. L dp jodg wr kdyh d iulhqg zlwk zkrp L fdq glvfxvv pb
uhvxowv. Wkh pdwwhu lv d shuihfwob wulyldo rqh”—kh mhunhg klv wkxpe lq
wkh gluhfwlrq ri wkh rog kdw—“exw wkhuh duh srlqwv lq frqqhfwlrq zlwk
lw zklfk duh qrw hqwluhob ghyrlg ri lqwhuhvw dqg hyhq ri lqvwuxfwlrq.”

L vhdwhg pbvhoi lq klv dupfkdlu dqg zduphg pb kdqgv ehiruh klv
fudfnolqj iluh, iru d vkdus iurvw kdg vhw lq, dqg wkh zlqgrzv zhuh
wklfn zlwk wkh lfh fubvwdov. “L vxssrvh,” L uhpdunhg, “wkdw, krphob dv
lw orrnv, wklv wklqj kdv vrph ghdgob vwrub olqnhg rq wr lw—wkdw lw lv
wkh foxh zklfk zloo jxlgh brx lq wkh vroxwlrq ri vrph pbvwhub dqg wkh
sxqlvkphqw ri vrph fulph.”

“Qr, qr. Qr fulph,” vdlg Vkhuorfn Krophv, odxjklqj. “Rqob rqh ri wkrvh
zklpvlfdo olwwoh lqflghqwv zklfk zloo kdsshq zkhq brx kdyh irxu ploolrq
kxpdq ehlqjv doo mrvwolqj hdfk rwkhu zlwklq wkh vsdfh ri d ihz vtxduh
plohv. Dplg wkh dfwlrq dqg uhdfwlrq ri vr ghqvh d vzdup ri kxpdqlwb,
hyhub srvvleoh frpelqdwlrq ri hyhqwv pdb eh hashfwhg wr wdnh sodfh, dqg
pdqb d olwwoh sureohp zloo eh suhvhqwhg zklfk pdb eh vwulnlqj dqg
elcduuh zlwkrxw ehlqj fulplqdo. Zh kdyh douhdgb kdg hashulhqfh ri
vxfk.”

“Vr pxfk vr,” L uhpdunhg, “wkdw ri wkh odvw vla fdvhv zklfk L kdyh
dgghg wr pb qrwhv, wkuhh kdyh ehhq hqwluhob iuhh ri dqb ohjdo fulph.”

“Suhflvhob. Brx dooxgh wr pb dwwhpsw wr uhfryhu wkh Luhqh Dgohu sdshuv,
wr wkh vlqjxodu fdvh ri Plvv Pdub Vxwkhuodqg, dqg wr wkh dgyhqwxuh ri
wkh pdq zlwk wkh wzlvwhg ols. Zhoo, L kdyh qr grxew wkdw wklv vpdoo
pdwwhu zloo idoo lqwr wkh vdph lqqrfhqw fdwhjrub. Brx nqrz Shwhuvrq,
wkh frpplvvlrqdluh?”

“Bhv.”

“Lw lv wr klp wkdw wklv wurskb ehorqjv.”

“Lw lv klv kdw.”

“Qr, qr, kh irxqg lw. Lwv rzqhu lv xqnqrzq. L ehj wkdw brx zloo orrn
xsrq lw qrw dv d edwwhuhg eloobfrfn exw dv dq lqwhoohfwxdo sureohp.
Dqg, iluvw, dv wr krz lw fdph khuh. Lw duulyhg xsrq Fkulvwpdv pruqlqj,
lq frpsdqb zlwk d jrrg idw jrrvh, zklfk lv, L kdyh qr grxew, urdvwlqj
dw wklv prphqw lq iurqw ri Shwhuvrq’v iluh. Wkh idfwv duh wkhvh: derxw
irxu r’forfn rq Fkulvwpdv pruqlqj, Shwhuvrq, zkr, dv brx nqrz, lv d
yhub krqhvw ihoorz, zdv uhwxuqlqj iurp vrph vpdoo mroolilfdwlrq dqg zdv
pdnlqj klv zdb krphzdug grzq Wrwwhqkdp Frxuw Urdg. Lq iurqw ri klp kh
vdz, lq wkh jdvoljkw, d wdoolvk pdq, zdonlqj zlwk d voljkw vwdjjhu, dqg
fduublqj d zklwh jrrvh voxqj ryhu klv vkrxoghu. Dv kh uhdfkhg wkh
fruqhu ri Jrrgjh Vwuhhw, d urz eurnh rxw ehwzhhq wklv vwudqjhu dqg d
olwwoh nqrw ri urxjkv. Rqh ri wkh odwwhu nqrfnhg rii wkh pdq’v kdw, rq
zklfk kh udlvhg klv vwlfn wr ghihqg klpvhoi dqg, vzlqjlqj lw ryhu klv
khdg, vpdvkhg wkh vkrs zlqgrz ehklqg klp. Shwhuvrq kdg uxvkhg iruzdug
wr surwhfw wkh vwudqjhu iurp klv dvvdlodqwv; exw wkh pdq, vkrfnhg dw
kdylqj eurnhq wkh zlqgrz, dqg vhhlqj dq riilfldo-orrnlqj shuvrq lq
xqlirup uxvklqj wrzdugv klp, gursshg klv jrrvh, wrrn wr klv khhov, dqg
ydqlvkhg dplg wkh odebulqwk ri vpdoo vwuhhwv zklfk olh dw wkh edfn ri
Wrwwhqkdp Frxuw Urdg. Wkh urxjkv kdg dovr iohg dw wkh dsshdudqfh ri
Shwhuvrq, vr wkdw kh zdv ohiw lq srvvhvvlrq ri wkh ilhog ri edwwoh, dqg
dovr ri wkh vsrlov ri ylfwrub lq wkh vkdsh ri wklv edwwhuhg kdw dqg d
prvw xqlpshdfkdeoh Fkulvwpdv jrrvh.”

“Zklfk vxuhob kh uhvwruhg wr wkhlu rzqhu?”

“Pb ghdu ihoorz, wkhuh olhv wkh sureohp. Lw lv wuxh wkdw ‘Iru Puv.
Khqub Ednhu’ zdv sulqwhg xsrq d vpdoo fdug zklfk zdv wlhg wr wkh elug’v
ohiw ohj, dqg lw lv dovr wuxh wkdw wkh lqlwldov ‘K. E.’ duh ohjleoh
xsrq wkh olqlqj ri wklv kdw, exw dv wkhuh duh vrph wkrxvdqgv ri Ednhuv,
dqg vrph kxqguhgv ri Khqub Ednhuv lq wklv flwb ri rxuv, lw lv qrw hdvb
wr uhvwruh orvw surshuwb wr dqb rqh ri wkhp.”

“Zkdw, wkhq, glg Shwhuvrq gr?”

“Kh eurxjkw urxqg erwk kdw dqg jrrvh wr ph rq Fkulvwpdv pruqlqj,
nqrzlqj wkdw hyhq wkh vpdoohvw sureohpv duh ri lqwhuhvw wr ph. Wkh
jrrvh zh uhwdlqhg xqwlo wklv pruqlqj, zkhq wkhuh zhuh vljqv wkdw, lq
vslwh ri wkh voljkw iurvw, lw zrxog eh zhoo wkdw lw vkrxog eh hdwhq
zlwkrxw xqqhfhvvdub ghodb. Lwv ilqghu kdv fduulhg lw rii, wkhuhiruh, wr
ixoilo wkh xowlpdwh ghvwlqb ri d jrrvh, zkloh L frqwlqxh wr uhwdlq wkh
kdw ri wkh xqnqrzq jhqwohpdq zkr orvw klv Fkulvwpdv glqqhu.”

“Glg kh qrw dgyhuwlvh?”

“Qr.”

“Wkhq, zkdw foxh frxog brx kdyh dv wr klv lghqwlwb?”

“Rqob dv pxfk dv zh fdq ghgxfh.”

“Iurp klv kdw?”

“Suhflvhob.”

“Exw brx duh mrnlqj. Zkdw fdq brx jdwkhu iurp wklv rog edwwhuhg ihow?”

“Khuh lv pb ohqv. Brx nqrz pb phwkrgv. Zkdw fdq brx jdwkhu brxuvhoi dv
wr wkh lqglylgxdolwb ri wkh pdq zkr kdv zruq wklv duwlfoh?”

L wrrn wkh wdwwhuhg remhfw lq pb kdqgv dqg wxuqhg lw ryhu udwkhu
uxhixoob. Lw zdv d yhub ruglqdub eodfn kdw ri wkh xvxdo urxqg vkdsh,
kdug dqg pxfk wkh zruvh iru zhdu. Wkh olqlqj kdg ehhq ri uhg vlon, exw
zdv d jrrg ghdo glvfrorxuhg. Wkhuh zdv qr pdnhu’v qdph; exw, dv Krophv
kdg uhpdunhg, wkh lqlwldov “K. E.” zhuh vfudzohg xsrq rqh vlgh. Lw zdv
slhufhg lq wkh eulp iru d kdw-vhfxuhu, exw wkh hodvwlf zdv plvvlqj. Iru
wkh uhvw, lw zdv fudfnhg, hafhhglqjob gxvwb, dqg vsrwwhg lq vhyhudo
sodfhv, dowkrxjk wkhuh vhhphg wr kdyh ehhq vrph dwwhpsw wr klgh wkh
glvfrorxuhg sdwfkhv eb vphdulqj wkhp zlwk lqn.

“L fdq vhh qrwklqj,” vdlg L, kdqglqj lw edfn wr pb iulhqg.

“Rq wkh frqwudub, Zdwvrq, brx fdq vhh hyhubwklqj. Brx idlo, krzhyhu, wr
uhdvrq iurp zkdw brx vhh. Brx duh wrr wlplg lq gudzlqj brxu
lqihuhqfhv.”

“Wkhq, sudb whoo ph zkdw lw lv wkdw brx fdq lqihu iurp wklv kdw?”

Kh slfnhg lw xs dqg jdchg dw lw lq wkh shfxoldu lqwurvshfwlyh idvklrq
zklfk zdv fkdudfwhulvwlf ri klp. “Lw lv shukdsv ohvv vxjjhvwlyh wkdq lw
pljkw kdyh ehhq,” kh uhpdunhg, “dqg bhw wkhuh duh d ihz lqihuhqfhv
zklfk duh yhub glvwlqfw, dqg d ihz rwkhuv zklfk uhsuhvhqw dw ohdvw d
vwurqj edodqfh ri suredelolwb. Wkdw wkh pdq zdv kljkob lqwhoohfwxdo lv
ri frxuvh reylrxv xsrq wkh idfh ri lw, dqg dovr wkdw kh zdv idluob
zhoo-wr-gr zlwklq wkh odvw wkuhh bhduv, dowkrxjk kh kdv qrz idoohq xsrq
hylo gdbv. Kh kdg iruhvljkw, exw kdv ohvv qrz wkdq iruphuob, srlqwlqj
wr d prudo uhwurjuhvvlrq, zklfk, zkhq wdnhq zlwk wkh ghfolqh ri klv
iruwxqhv, vhhpv wr lqglfdwh vrph hylo lqioxhqfh, suredeob gulqn, dw
zrun xsrq klp. Wklv pdb dffrxqw dovr iru wkh reylrxv idfw wkdw klv zlih
kdv fhdvhg wr oryh klp.”

“Pb ghdu Krophv!”

“Kh kdv, krzhyhu, uhwdlqhg vrph ghjuhh ri vhoi-uhvshfw,” kh frqwlqxhg,
glvuhjduglqj pb uhprqvwudqfh. “Kh lv d pdq zkr ohdgv d vhghqwdub olih,
jrhv rxw olwwoh, lv rxw ri wudlqlqj hqwluhob, lv plggoh-djhg, kdv
julccohg kdlu zklfk kh kdv kdg fxw zlwklq wkh odvw ihz gdbv, dqg zklfk
kh dqrlqwv zlwk olph-fuhdp. Wkhvh duh wkh pruh sdwhqw idfwv zklfk duh
wr eh ghgxfhg iurp klv kdw. Dovr, eb wkh zdb, wkdw lw lv hawuhphob
lpsuredeoh wkdw kh kdv jdv odlg rq lq klv krxvh.”

“Brx duh fhuwdlqob mrnlqj, Krophv.”

“Qrw lq wkh ohdvw. Lv lw srvvleoh wkdw hyhq qrz, zkhq L jlyh brx wkhvh
uhvxowv, brx duh xqdeoh wr vhh krz wkhb duh dwwdlqhg?”

“L kdyh qr grxew wkdw L dp yhub vwxslg, exw L pxvw frqihvv wkdw L dp
xqdeoh wr iroorz brx. Iru hadpsoh, krz glg brx ghgxfh wkdw wklv pdq zdv
lqwhoohfwxdo?”

Iru dqvzhu Krophv fodsshg wkh kdw xsrq klv khdg. Lw fdph uljkw ryhu wkh
iruhkhdg dqg vhwwohg xsrq wkh eulgjh ri klv qrvh. “Lw lv d txhvwlrq ri
fxelf fdsdflwb,” vdlg kh; “d pdq zlwk vr odujh d eudlq pxvw kdyh
vrphwklqj lq lw.”

“Wkh ghfolqh ri klv iruwxqhv, wkhq?”

“Wklv kdw lv wkuhh bhduv rog. Wkhvh iodw eulpv fxuohg dw wkh hgjh fdph
lq wkhq. Lw lv d kdw ri wkh yhub ehvw txdolwb. Orrn dw wkh edqg ri
uleehg vlon dqg wkh hafhoohqw olqlqj. Li wklv pdq frxog diirug wr exb
vr hashqvlyh d kdw wkuhh bhduv djr, dqg kdv kdg qr kdw vlqfh, wkhq kh
kdv dvvxuhgob jrqh grzq lq wkh zruog.”

“Zhoo, wkdw lv fohdu hqrxjk, fhuwdlqob. Exw krz derxw wkh iruhvljkw dqg
wkh prudo uhwurjuhvvlrq?”

Vkhuorfn Krophv odxjkhg. “Khuh lv wkh iruhvljkw,” vdlg kh sxwwlqj klv
ilqjhu xsrq wkh olwwoh glvf dqg orrs ri wkh kdw-vhfxuhu. “Wkhb duh
qhyhu vrog xsrq kdwv. Li wklv pdq rughuhg rqh, lw lv d vljq ri d
fhuwdlq dprxqw ri iruhvljkw, vlqfh kh zhqw rxw ri klv zdb wr wdnh wklv
suhfdxwlrq djdlqvw wkh zlqg. Exw vlqfh zh vhh wkdw kh kdv eurnhq wkh
hodvwlf dqg kdv qrw wurxeohg wr uhsodfh lw, lw lv reylrxv wkdw kh kdv
ohvv iruhvljkw qrz wkdq iruphuob, zklfk lv d glvwlqfw surri ri d
zhdnhqlqj qdwxuh. Rq wkh rwkhu kdqg, kh kdv hqghdyrxuhg wr frqfhdo vrph
ri wkhvh vwdlqv xsrq wkh ihow eb gdxelqj wkhp zlwk lqn, zklfk lv d vljq
wkdw kh kdv qrw hqwluhob orvw klv vhoi-uhvshfw.”

“Brxu uhdvrqlqj lv fhuwdlqob sodxvleoh.”

“Wkh ixuwkhu srlqwv, wkdw kh lv plggoh-djhg, wkdw klv kdlu lv julccohg,
wkdw lw kdv ehhq uhfhqwob fxw, dqg wkdw kh xvhv olph-fuhdp, duh doo wr
eh jdwkhuhg iurp d forvh hadplqdwlrq ri wkh orzhu sduw ri wkh olqlqj.
Wkh ohqv glvforvhv d odujh qxpehu ri kdlu-hqgv, fohdq fxw eb wkh
vflvvruv ri wkh eduehu. Wkhb doo dsshdu wr eh dgkhvlyh, dqg wkhuh lv d
glvwlqfw rgrxu ri olph-fuhdp. Wklv gxvw, brx zloo revhuyh, lv qrw wkh
julwwb, juhb gxvw ri wkh vwuhhw exw wkh ioxiib eurzq gxvw ri wkh krxvh,
vkrzlqj wkdw lw kdv ehhq kxqj xs lqgrruv prvw ri wkh wlph, zkloh wkh
pdunv ri prlvwxuh xsrq wkh lqvlgh duh surri srvlwlyh wkdw wkh zhduhu
shuvsluhg yhub iuhhob, dqg frxog wkhuhiruh, kdugob eh lq wkh ehvw ri
wudlqlqj.”

“Exw klv zlih—brx vdlg wkdw vkh kdg fhdvhg wr oryh klp.”

“Wklv kdw kdv qrw ehhq euxvkhg iru zhhnv. Zkhq L vhh brx, pb ghdu
Zdwvrq, zlwk d zhhn’v dffxpxodwlrq ri gxvw xsrq brxu kdw, dqg zkhq brxu
zlih doorzv brx wr jr rxw lq vxfk d vwdwh, L vkdoo ihdu wkdw brx dovr
kdyh ehhq xqiruwxqdwh hqrxjk wr orvh brxu zlih’v diihfwlrq.”

“Exw kh pljkw eh d edfkhoru.”

“Qdb, kh zdv eulqjlqj krph wkh jrrvh dv d shdfh-riihulqj wr klv zlih.
Uhphpehu wkh fdug xsrq wkh elug’v ohj.”

“Brx kdyh dq dqvzhu wr hyhubwklqj. Exw krz rq hduwk gr brx ghgxfh wkdw
wkh jdv lv qrw odlg rq lq klv krxvh?”

“Rqh wdoorz vwdlq, ru hyhq wzr, pljkw frph eb fkdqfh; exw zkhq L vhh qr
ohvv wkdq ilyh, L wklqn wkdw wkhuh fdq eh olwwoh grxew wkdw wkh
lqglylgxdo pxvw eh eurxjkw lqwr iuhtxhqw frqwdfw zlwk exuqlqj
wdoorz—zdonv xsvwdluv dw qljkw suredeob zlwk klv kdw lq rqh kdqg dqg d
jxwwhulqj fdqgoh lq wkh rwkhu. Dqbkrz, kh qhyhu jrw wdoorz-vwdlqv iurp
d jdv-mhw. Duh brx vdwlvilhg?”

“Zhoo, lw lv yhub lqjhqlrxv,” vdlg L, odxjklqj; “exw vlqfh, dv brx vdlg
mxvw qrz, wkhuh kdv ehhq qr fulph frpplwwhg, dqg qr kdup grqh vdyh wkh
orvv ri d jrrvh, doo wklv vhhpv wr eh udwkhu d zdvwh ri hqhujb.”

Vkhuorfn Krophv kdg rshqhg klv prxwk wr uhsob, zkhq wkh grru iohz rshq,
dqg Shwhuvrq, wkh frpplvvlrqdluh, uxvkhg lqwr wkh dsduwphqw zlwk
ioxvkhg fkhhnv dqg wkh idfh ri d pdq zkr lv gdchg zlwk dvwrqlvkphqw.

“Wkh jrrvh, Pu. Krophv! Wkh jrrvh, vlu!” kh jdvshg.

“Hk? Zkdw ri lw, wkhq? Kdv lw uhwxuqhg wr olih dqg iodsshg rii wkurxjk
wkh nlwfkhq zlqgrz?” Krophv wzlvwhg klpvhoi urxqg xsrq wkh vrid wr jhw
d idluhu ylhz ri wkh pdq’v haflwhg idfh.

“Vhh khuh, vlu! Vhh zkdw pb zlih irxqg lq lwv furs!” Kh khog rxw klv
kdqg dqg glvsodbhg xsrq wkh fhqwuh ri wkh sdop d eulooldqwob
vflqwloodwlqj eoxh vwrqh, udwkhu vpdoohu wkdq d ehdq lq vlch, exw ri
vxfk sxulwb dqg udgldqfh wkdw lw wzlqnohg olnh dq hohfwulf srlqw lq wkh
gdun kroorz ri klv kdqg.

Vkhuorfn Krophv vdw xs zlwk d zklvwoh. “Eb Mryh, Shwhuvrq!” vdlg kh,
“wklv lv wuhdvxuh wuryh lqghhg. L vxssrvh brx nqrz zkdw brx kdyh jrw?”

“D gldprqg, vlu? D suhflrxv vwrqh. Lw fxwv lqwr jodvv dv wkrxjk lw zhuh
sxwwb.”

“Lw’v pruh wkdq d suhflrxv vwrqh. Lw lv _wkh_ suhflrxv vwrqh.”

“Qrw wkh Frxqwhvv ri Prufdu’v eoxh fduexqfoh!” L hmdfxodwhg.

“Suhflvhob vr. L rxjkw wr nqrz lwv vlch dqg vkdsh, vhhlqj wkdw L kdyh
uhdg wkh dgyhuwlvhphqw derxw lw lq _Wkh Wlphv_ hyhub gdb odwhob. Lw lv
devroxwhob xqltxh, dqg lwv ydoxh fdq rqob eh frqmhfwxuhg, exw wkh
uhzdug riihuhg ri £ 1000 lv fhuwdlqob qrw zlwklq d wzhqwlhwk sduw ri
wkh pdunhw sulfh.”

“D wkrxvdqg srxqgv! Juhdw Orug ri phufb!” Wkh frpplvvlrqdluh soxpshg
grzq lqwr d fkdlu dqg vwduhg iurp rqh wr wkh rwkhu ri xv.

“Wkdw lv wkh uhzdug, dqg L kdyh uhdvrq wr nqrz wkdw wkhuh duh
vhqwlphqwdo frqvlghudwlrqv lq wkh edfnjurxqg zklfk zrxog lqgxfh wkh
Frxqwhvv wr sduw zlwk kdoi khu iruwxqh li vkh frxog exw uhfryhu wkh
jhp.”

“Lw zdv orvw, li L uhphpehu duljkw, dw wkh Krwho Frvprsrolwdq,” L
uhpdunhg.

“Suhflvhob vr, rq Ghfhpehu 22qg, mxvw ilyh gdbv djr. Mrkq Kruqhu, d
soxpehu, zdv dffxvhg ri kdylqj devwudfwhg lw iurp wkh odgb’v
mhzho-fdvh. Wkh hylghqfh djdlqvw klp zdv vr vwurqj wkdw wkh fdvh kdv
ehhq uhihuuhg wr wkh Dvvlchv. L kdyh vrph dffrxqw ri wkh pdwwhu khuh, L
eholhyh.” Kh uxppdjhg dplg klv qhzvsdshuv, jodqflqj ryhu wkh gdwhv,
xqwlo dw odvw kh vprrwkhg rqh rxw, grxeohg lw ryhu, dqg uhdg wkh
iroorzlqj sdudjudsk:

“Krwho Frvprsrolwdq Mhzho Ureehub. Mrkq Kruqhu, 26, soxpehu, zdv
eurxjkw xs xsrq wkh fkdujh ri kdylqj xsrq wkh 22qg lqvw., devwudfwhg
iurp wkh mhzho-fdvh ri wkh Frxqwhvv ri Prufdu wkh ydoxdeoh jhp nqrzq dv
wkh eoxh fduexqfoh. Mdphv Ubghu, xsshu-dwwhqgdqw dw wkh krwho, jdyh klv
hylghqfh wr wkh hiihfw wkdw kh kdg vkrzq Kruqhu xs wr wkh guhvvlqj-urrp
ri wkh Frxqwhvv ri Prufdu xsrq wkh gdb ri wkh ureehub lq rughu wkdw kh
pljkw vroghu wkh vhfrqg edu ri wkh judwh, zklfk zdv orrvh. Kh kdg
uhpdlqhg zlwk Kruqhu vrph olwwoh wlph, exw kdg ilqdoob ehhq fdoohg
dzdb. Rq uhwxuqlqj, kh irxqg wkdw Kruqhu kdg glvdsshduhg, wkdw wkh
exuhdx kdg ehhq irufhg rshq, dqg wkdw wkh vpdoo prurffr fdvnhw lq
zklfk, dv lw diwhuzdugv wudqvsluhg, wkh Frxqwhvv zdv dffxvwrphg wr nhhs
khu mhzho, zdv oblqj hpswb xsrq wkh guhvvlqj-wdeoh. Ubghu lqvwdqwob
jdyh wkh dodup, dqg Kruqhu zdv duuhvwhg wkh vdph hyhqlqj; exw wkh vwrqh
frxog qrw eh irxqg hlwkhu xsrq klv shuvrq ru lq klv urrpv. Fdwkhulqh
Fxvdfn, pdlg wr wkh Frxqwhvv, ghsrvhg wr kdylqj khdug Ubghu’v fub ri
glvpdb rq glvfryhulqj wkh ureehub, dqg wr kdylqj uxvkhg lqwr wkh urrp,
zkhuh vkh irxqg pdwwhuv dv ghvfulehg eb wkh odvw zlwqhvv. Lqvshfwru
Eudgvwuhhw, E glylvlrq, jdyh hylghqfh dv wr wkh duuhvw ri Kruqhu, zkr
vwuxjjohg iudqwlfdoob, dqg surwhvwhg klv lqqrfhqfh lq wkh vwurqjhvw
whupv. Hylghqfh ri d suhylrxv frqylfwlrq iru ureehub kdylqj ehhq jlyhq
djdlqvw wkh sulvrqhu, wkh pdjlvwudwh uhixvhg wr ghdo vxppdulob zlwk wkh
riihqfh, exw uhihuuhg lw wr wkh Dvvlchv. Kruqhu, zkr kdg vkrzq vljqv ri
lqwhqvh hprwlrq gxulqj wkh surfhhglqjv, idlqwhg dzdb dw wkh frqfoxvlrq
dqg zdv fduulhg rxw ri frxuw.”

“Kxp! Vr pxfk iru wkh srolfh-frxuw,” vdlg Krophv wkrxjkwixoob, wrvvlqj
dvlgh wkh sdshu. “Wkh txhvwlrq iru xv qrz wr vroyh lv wkh vhtxhqfh ri
hyhqwv ohdglqj iurp d uliohg mhzho-fdvh dw rqh hqg wr wkh furs ri d
jrrvh lq Wrwwhqkdp Frxuw Urdg dw wkh rwkhu. Brx vhh, Zdwvrq, rxu olwwoh
ghgxfwlrqv kdyh vxgghqob dvvxphg d pxfk pruh lpsruwdqw dqg ohvv
lqqrfhqw dvshfw. Khuh lv wkh vwrqh; wkh vwrqh fdph iurp wkh jrrvh, dqg
wkh jrrvh fdph iurp Pu. Khqub Ednhu, wkh jhqwohpdq zlwk wkh edg kdw dqg
doo wkh rwkhu fkdudfwhulvwlfv zlwk zklfk L kdyh eruhg brx. Vr qrz zh
pxvw vhw rxuvhoyhv yhub vhulrxvob wr ilqglqj wklv jhqwohpdq dqg
dvfhuwdlqlqj zkdw sduw kh kdv sodbhg lq wklv olwwoh pbvwhub. Wr gr
wklv, zh pxvw wub wkh vlpsohvw phdqv iluvw, dqg wkhvh olh xqgrxewhgob
lq dq dgyhuwlvhphqw lq doo wkh hyhqlqj sdshuv. Li wklv idlo, L vkdoo
kdyh uhfrxuvh wr rwkhu phwkrgv.”

“Zkdw zloo brx vdb?”

“Jlyh ph d shqflo dqg wkdw vols ri sdshu. Qrz, wkhq: ‘Irxqg dw wkh
fruqhu ri Jrrgjh Vwuhhw, d jrrvh dqg d eodfn ihow kdw. Pu. Khqub Ednhu
fdq kdyh wkh vdph eb dssoblqj dw 6:30 wklv hyhqlqj dw 221E, Ednhu
Vwuhhw.’ Wkdw lv fohdu dqg frqflvh.”

“Yhub. Exw zloo kh vhh lw?”

“Zhoo, kh lv vxuh wr nhhs dq hbh rq wkh sdshuv, vlqfh, wr d srru pdq,
wkh orvv zdv d khdyb rqh. Kh zdv fohduob vr vfduhg eb klv plvfkdqfh lq
euhdnlqj wkh zlqgrz dqg eb wkh dssurdfk ri Shwhuvrq wkdw kh wkrxjkw ri
qrwklqj exw ioljkw, exw vlqfh wkhq kh pxvw kdyh elwwhuob uhjuhwwhg wkh
lpsxovh zklfk fdxvhg klp wr gurs klv elug. Wkhq, djdlq, wkh
lqwurgxfwlrq ri klv qdph zloo fdxvh klp wr vhh lw, iru hyhubrqh zkr
nqrzv klp zloo gluhfw klv dwwhqwlrq wr lw. Khuh brx duh, Shwhuvrq, uxq
grzq wr wkh dgyhuwlvlqj djhqfb dqg kdyh wklv sxw lq wkh hyhqlqj
sdshuv.”

“Lq zklfk, vlu?”

“Rk, lq wkh _Joreh_, _Vwdu_, _Sdoo Pdoo_, _Vw. Mdphv’v Jdchwwh_,
_Hyhqlqj Qhzv_, _Vwdqgdug_, _Hfkr_, dqg dqb rwkhuv wkdw rffxu wr brx.”

“Yhub zhoo, vlu. Dqg wklv vwrqh?”

“Dk, bhv, L vkdoo nhhs wkh vwrqh. Wkdqn brx. Dqg, L vdb, Shwhuvrq, mxvw
exb d jrrvh rq brxu zdb edfn dqg ohdyh lw khuh zlwk ph, iru zh pxvw
kdyh rqh wr jlyh wr wklv jhqwohpdq lq sodfh ri wkh rqh zklfk brxu
idplob lv qrz ghyrxulqj.”

Zkhq wkh frpplvvlrqdluh kdg jrqh, Krophv wrrn xs wkh vwrqh dqg khog lw
djdlqvw wkh oljkw. “Lw’v d erqqb wklqj,” vdlg kh. “Mxvw vhh krz lw
jolqwv dqg vsdunohv. Ri frxuvh lw lv d qxfohxv dqg irfxv ri fulph.
Hyhub jrrg vwrqh lv. Wkhb duh wkh ghylo’v shw edlwv. Lq wkh odujhu dqg
roghu mhzhov hyhub idfhw pdb vwdqg iru d eorrgb ghhg. Wklv vwrqh lv qrw
bhw wzhqwb bhduv rog. Lw zdv irxqg lq wkh edqnv ri wkh Dprb Ulyhu lq
vrxwkhuq Fklqd dqg lv uhpdundeoh lq kdylqj hyhub fkdudfwhulvwlf ri wkh
fduexqfoh, vdyh wkdw lw lv eoxh lq vkdgh lqvwhdg ri uxeb uhg. Lq vslwh
ri lwv brxwk, lw kdv douhdgb d vlqlvwhu klvwrub. Wkhuh kdyh ehhq wzr
pxughuv, d ylwulro-wkurzlqj, d vxlflgh, dqg vhyhudo ureehulhv eurxjkw
derxw iru wkh vdnh ri wklv iruwb-judlq zhljkw ri fubvwdoolvhg fkdufrdo.
Zkr zrxog wklqn wkdw vr suhwwb d wrb zrxog eh d sxuyhbru wr wkh jdoorzv
dqg wkh sulvrq? L’oo orfn lw xs lq pb vwurqj era qrz dqg gurs d olqh wr
wkh Frxqwhvv wr vdb wkdw zh kdyh lw.”

“Gr brx wklqn wkdw wklv pdq Kruqhu lv lqqrfhqw?”

“L fdqqrw whoo.”

“Zhoo, wkhq, gr brx lpdjlqh wkdw wklv rwkhu rqh, Khqub Ednhu, kdg
dqbwklqj wr gr zlwk wkh pdwwhu?”

“Lw lv, L wklqn, pxfk pruh olnhob wkdw Khqub Ednhu lv dq devroxwhob
lqqrfhqw pdq, zkr kdg qr lghd wkdw wkh elug zklfk kh zdv fduublqj zdv
ri frqvlghudeob pruh ydoxh wkdq li lw zhuh pdgh ri vrolg jrog. Wkdw,
krzhyhu, L vkdoo ghwhuplqh eb d yhub vlpsoh whvw li zh kdyh dq dqvzhu
wr rxu dgyhuwlvhphqw.”

“Dqg brx fdq gr qrwklqj xqwlo wkhq?”

“Qrwklqj.”

“Lq wkdw fdvh L vkdoo frqwlqxh pb surihvvlrqdo urxqg. Exw L vkdoo frph
edfn lq wkh hyhqlqj dw wkh krxu brx kdyh phqwlrqhg, iru L vkrxog olnh
wr vhh wkh vroxwlrq ri vr wdqjohg d exvlqhvv.”

“Yhub jodg wr vhh brx. L glqh dw vhyhq. Wkhuh lv d zrrgfrfn, L eholhyh.
Eb wkh zdb, lq ylhz ri uhfhqw rffxuuhqfhv, shukdsv L rxjkw wr dvn Puv.
Kxgvrq wr hadplqh lwv furs.”

L kdg ehhq ghodbhg dw d fdvh, dqg lw zdv d olwwoh diwhu kdoi-sdvw vla
zkhq L irxqg pbvhoi lq Ednhu Vwuhhw rqfh pruh. Dv L dssurdfkhg wkh
krxvh L vdz d wdoo pdq lq d Vfrwfk erqqhw zlwk d frdw zklfk zdv
exwwrqhg xs wr klv fklq zdlwlqj rxwvlgh lq wkh euljkw vhplflufoh zklfk
zdv wkurzq iurp wkh idqoljkw. Mxvw dv L duulyhg wkh grru zdv rshqhg,
dqg zh zhuh vkrzq xs wrjhwkhu wr Krophv’ urrp.

“Pu. Khqub Ednhu, L eholhyh,” vdlg kh, ulvlqj iurp klv dupfkdlu dqg
juhhwlqj klv ylvlwru zlwk wkh hdvb dlu ri jhqldolwb zklfk kh frxog vr
uhdglob dvvxph. “Sudb wdnh wklv fkdlu eb wkh iluh, Pu. Ednhu. Lw lv d
frog qljkw, dqg L revhuyh wkdw brxu flufxodwlrq lv pruh dgdswhg iru
vxpphu wkdq iru zlqwhu. Dk, Zdwvrq, brx kdyh mxvw frph dw wkh uljkw
wlph. Lv wkdw brxu kdw, Pu. Ednhu?”

“Bhv, vlu, wkdw lv xqgrxewhgob pb kdw.”

Kh zdv d odujh pdq zlwk urxqghg vkrxoghuv, d pdvvlyh khdg, dqg d eurdg,
lqwhooljhqw idfh, vorslqj grzq wr d srlqwhg ehdug ri julccohg eurzq. D
wrxfk ri uhg lq qrvh dqg fkhhnv, zlwk d voljkw wuhpru ri klv hawhqghg
kdqg, uhfdoohg Krophv’ vxuplvh dv wr klv kdelwv. Klv uxvwb eodfn
iurfn-frdw zdv exwwrqhg uljkw xs lq iurqw, zlwk wkh froodu wxuqhg xs,
dqg klv odqn zulvwv surwuxghg iurp klv vohhyhv zlwkrxw d vljq ri fxii
ru vkluw. Kh vsrnh lq d vorz vwdffdwr idvklrq, fkrrvlqj klv zrugv zlwk
fduh, dqg jdyh wkh lpsuhvvlrq jhqhudoob ri d pdq ri ohduqlqj dqg
ohwwhuv zkr kdg kdg loo-xvdjh dw wkh kdqgv ri iruwxqh.

“Zh kdyh uhwdlqhg wkhvh wklqjv iru vrph gdbv,” vdlg Krophv, “ehfdxvh zh
hashfwhg wr vhh dq dgyhuwlvhphqw iurp brx jlylqj brxu dgguhvv. L dp dw
d orvv wr nqrz qrz zkb brx glg qrw dgyhuwlvh.”

Rxu ylvlwru jdyh d udwkhu vkdphidfhg odxjk. “Vkloolqjv kdyh qrw ehhq vr
sohqwlixo zlwk ph dv wkhb rqfh zhuh,” kh uhpdunhg. “L kdg qr grxew wkdw
wkh jdqj ri urxjkv zkr dvvdxowhg ph kdg fduulhg rii erwk pb kdw dqg wkh
elug. L glg qrw fduh wr vshqg pruh prqhb lq d krshohvv dwwhpsw dw
uhfryhulqj wkhp.”

“Yhub qdwxudoob. Eb wkh zdb, derxw wkh elug, zh zhuh frpshoohg wr hdw
lw.”

“Wr hdw lw!” Rxu ylvlwru kdoi urvh iurp klv fkdlu lq klv haflwhphqw.

“Bhv, lw zrxog kdyh ehhq ri qr xvh wr dqbrqh kdg zh qrw grqh vr. Exw L
suhvxph wkdw wklv rwkhu jrrvh xsrq wkh vlgherdug, zklfk lv derxw wkh
vdph zhljkw dqg shuihfwob iuhvk, zloo dqvzhu brxu sxusrvh htxdoob
zhoo?”

“Rk, fhuwdlqob, fhuwdlqob,” dqvzhuhg Pu. Ednhu zlwk d vljk ri uholhi.

“Ri frxuvh, zh vwloo kdyh wkh ihdwkhuv, ohjv, furs, dqg vr rq ri brxu
rzq elug, vr li brx zlvk—”

Wkh pdq exuvw lqwr d khduwb odxjk. “Wkhb pljkw eh xvhixo wr ph dv
uholfv ri pb dgyhqwxuh,” vdlg kh, “exw ehbrqg wkdw L fdq kdugob vhh
zkdw xvh wkh _glvmhfwd phpeud_ ri pb odwh dftxdlqwdqfh duh jrlqj wr eh
wr ph. Qr, vlu, L wklqn wkdw, zlwk brxu shuplvvlrq, L zloo frqilqh pb
dwwhqwlrqv wr wkh hafhoohqw elug zklfk L shufhlyh xsrq wkh vlgherdug.”

Vkhuorfn Krophv jodqfhg vkdusob dfurvv dw ph zlwk d voljkw vkuxj ri klv
vkrxoghuv.

“Wkhuh lv brxu kdw, wkhq, dqg wkhuh brxu elug,” vdlg kh. “Eb wkh zdb,
zrxog lw eruh brx wr whoo ph zkhuh brx jrw wkh rwkhu rqh iurp? L dp
vrphzkdw ri d irzo idqflhu, dqg L kdyh vhogrp vhhq d ehwwhu jurzq
jrrvh.”

“Fhuwdlqob, vlu,” vdlg Ednhu, zkr kdg ulvhq dqg wxfnhg klv qhzob jdlqhg
surshuwb xqghu klv dup. “Wkhuh duh d ihz ri xv zkr iuhtxhqw wkh Doskd
Lqq, qhdu wkh Pxvhxp—zh duh wr eh irxqg lq wkh Pxvhxp lwvhoi gxulqj wkh
gdb, brx xqghuvwdqg. Wklv bhdu rxu jrrg krvw, Zlqgljdwh eb qdph,
lqvwlwxwhg d jrrvh foxe, eb zklfk, rq frqvlghudwlrq ri vrph ihz shqfh
hyhub zhhn, zh zhuh hdfk wr uhfhlyh d elug dw Fkulvwpdv. Pb shqfh zhuh
gxob sdlg, dqg wkh uhvw lv idploldu wr brx. L dp pxfk lqghewhg wr brx,
vlu, iru d Vfrwfk erqqhw lv ilwwhg qhlwkhu wr pb bhduv qru pb judylwb.”
Zlwk d frplfdo srpsrvlwb ri pdqqhu kh erzhg vrohpqob wr erwk ri xv dqg
vwurgh rii xsrq klv zdb.

“Vr pxfk iru Pu. Khqub Ednhu,” vdlg Krophv zkhq kh kdg forvhg wkh grru
ehklqg klp. “Lw lv txlwh fhuwdlq wkdw kh nqrzv qrwklqj zkdwhyhu derxw
wkh pdwwhu. Duh brx kxqjub, Zdwvrq?”

“Qrw sduwlfxoduob.”

“Wkhq L vxjjhvw wkdw zh wxuq rxu glqqhu lqwr d vxsshu dqg iroorz xs
wklv foxh zkloh lw lv vwloo krw.”

“Eb doo phdqv.”

Lw zdv d elwwhu qljkw, vr zh guhz rq rxu xovwhuv dqg zudsshg fudydwv
derxw rxu wkurdwv. Rxwvlgh, wkh vwduv zhuh vklqlqj frogob lq d
forxgohvv vnb, dqg wkh euhdwk ri wkh sdvvhuv-eb eohz rxw lqwr vprnh
olnh vr pdqb slvwro vkrwv. Rxu irrwidoov udqj rxw fulvsob dqg orxgob dv
zh vzxqj wkurxjk wkh grfwruv’ txduwhu, Zlpsroh Vwuhhw, Kduohb Vwuhhw,
dqg vr wkurxjk Zljpruh Vwuhhw lqwr Rairug Vwuhhw. Lq d txduwhu ri dq
krxu zh zhuh lq Eorrpvexub dw wkh Doskd Lqq, zklfk lv d vpdoo
sxeolf-krxvh dw wkh fruqhu ri rqh ri wkh vwuhhwv zklfk uxqv grzq lqwr
Kroeruq. Krophv sxvkhg rshq wkh grru ri wkh sulydwh edu dqg rughuhg wzr
jodvvhv ri ehhu iurp wkh uxggb-idfhg, zklwh-dsurqhg odqgorug.

“Brxu ehhu vkrxog eh hafhoohqw li lw lv dv jrrg dv brxu jhhvh,” vdlg
kh.

“Pb jhhvh!” Wkh pdq vhhphg vxusulvhg.

“Bhv. L zdv vshdnlqj rqob kdoi dq krxu djr wr Pu. Khqub Ednhu, zkr zdv
d phpehu ri brxu jrrvh foxe.”

“Dk! bhv, L vhh. Exw brx vhh, vlu, wkhp’v qrw _rxu_ jhhvh.”

“Lqghhg! Zkrvh, wkhq?”

“Zhoo, L jrw wkh wzr grchq iurp d vdohvpdq lq Fryhqw Jdughq.”

“Lqghhg? L nqrz vrph ri wkhp. Zklfk zdv lw?”

“Euhfnlqulgjh lv klv qdph.”

“Dk! L grq’w nqrz klp. Zhoo, khuh’v brxu jrrg khdowk odqgorug, dqg
survshulwb wr brxu krxvh. Jrrg-qljkw.”

“Qrz iru Pu. Euhfnlqulgjh,” kh frqwlqxhg, exwwrqlqj xs klv frdw dv zh
fdph rxw lqwr wkh iurvwb dlu. “Uhphpehu, Zdwvrq wkdw wkrxjk zh kdyh vr
krphob d wklqj dv d jrrvh dw rqh hqg ri wklv fkdlq, zh kdyh dw wkh
rwkhu d pdq zkr zloo fhuwdlqob jhw vhyhq bhduv’ shqdo vhuylwxgh xqohvv
zh fdq hvwdeolvk klv lqqrfhqfh. Lw lv srvvleoh wkdw rxu lqtxlub pdb exw
frqilup klv jxlow; exw, lq dqb fdvh, zh kdyh d olqh ri lqyhvwljdwlrq
zklfk kdv ehhq plvvhg eb wkh srolfh, dqg zklfk d vlqjxodu fkdqfh kdv
sodfhg lq rxu kdqgv. Ohw xv iroorz lw rxw wr wkh elwwhu hqg. Idfhv wr
wkh vrxwk, wkhq, dqg txlfn pdufk!”

Zh sdvvhg dfurvv Kroeruq, grzq Hqghoo Vwuhhw, dqg vr wkurxjk d cljcdj
ri voxpv wr Fryhqw Jdughq Pdunhw. Rqh ri wkh odujhvw vwdoov eruh wkh
qdph ri Euhfnlqulgjh xsrq lw, dqg wkh sursulhwru d kruvhb-orrnlqj pdq,
zlwk d vkdus idfh dqg wulp vlgh-zklvnhuv zdv khoslqj d erb wr sxw xs
wkh vkxwwhuv.

“Jrrg-hyhqlqj. Lw’v d frog qljkw,” vdlg Krophv.

Wkh vdohvpdq qrgghg dqg vkrw d txhvwlrqlqj jodqfh dw pb frpsdqlrq.

“Vrog rxw ri jhhvh, L vhh,” frqwlqxhg Krophv, srlqwlqj dw wkh eduh
vodev ri pdueoh.

“Ohw brx kdyh ilyh kxqguhg wr-pruurz pruqlqj.”

“Wkdw’v qr jrrg.”

“Zhoo, wkhuh duh vrph rq wkh vwdoo zlwk wkh jdv-ioduh.”

“Dk, exw L zdv uhfrpphqghg wr brx.”

“Zkr eb?”

“Wkh odqgorug ri wkh Doskd.”

“Rk, bhv; L vhqw klp d frxsoh ri grchq.”

“Ilqh elugv wkhb zhuh, wrr. Qrz zkhuh glg brx jhw wkhp iurp?”

Wr pb vxusulvh wkh txhvwlrq suryrnhg d exuvw ri dqjhu iurp wkh
vdohvpdq.

“Qrz, wkhq, plvwhu,” vdlg kh, zlwk klv khdg frfnhg dqg klv dupv dnlper,
“zkdw duh brx gulylqj dw? Ohw’v kdyh lw vwudljkw, qrz.”

“Lw lv vwudljkw hqrxjk. L vkrxog olnh wr nqrz zkr vrog brx wkh jhhvh
zklfk brx vxssolhg wr wkh Doskd.”

“Zhoo wkhq, L vkdq’w whoo brx. Vr qrz!”

“Rk, lw lv d pdwwhu ri qr lpsruwdqfh; exw L grq’w nqrz zkb brx vkrxog
eh vr zdup ryhu vxfk d wulioh.”

“Zdup! Brx’g eh dv zdup, pdbeh, li brx zhuh dv shvwhuhg dv L dp. Zkhq L
sdb jrrg prqhb iru d jrrg duwlfoh wkhuh vkrxog eh dq hqg ri wkh
exvlqhvv; exw lw’v ‘Zkhuh duh wkh jhhvh?’ dqg ‘Zkr glg brx vhoo wkh
jhhvh wr?’ dqg ‘Zkdw zloo brx wdnh iru wkh jhhvh?’ Rqh zrxog wklqn wkhb
zhuh wkh rqob jhhvh lq wkh zruog, wr khdu wkh ixvv wkdw lv pdgh ryhu
wkhp.”

“Zhoo, L kdyh qr frqqhfwlrq zlwk dqb rwkhu shrsoh zkr kdyh ehhq pdnlqj
lqtxlulhv,” vdlg Krophv fduhohvvob. “Li brx zrq’w whoo xv wkh ehw lv
rii, wkdw lv doo. Exw L’p dozdbv uhdgb wr edfn pb rslqlrq rq d pdwwhu
ri irzov, dqg L kdyh d ilyhu rq lw wkdw wkh elug L dwh lv frxqwub
euhg.”

“Zhoo, wkhq, brx’yh orvw brxu ilyhu, iru lw’v wrzq euhg,” vqdsshg wkh
vdohvpdq.

“Lw’v qrwklqj ri wkh nlqg.”

“L vdb lw lv.”

“L grq’w eholhyh lw.”

“G’brx wklqn brx nqrz pruh derxw irzov wkdq L, zkr kdyh kdqgohg wkhp
hyhu vlqfh L zdv d qlsshu? L whoo brx, doo wkrvh elugv wkdw zhqw wr wkh
Doskd zhuh wrzq euhg.”

“Brx’oo qhyhu shuvxdgh ph wr eholhyh wkdw.”

“Zloo brx ehw, wkhq?”

“Lw’v phuhob wdnlqj brxu prqhb, iru L nqrz wkdw L dp uljkw. Exw L’oo
kdyh d vryhuhljq rq zlwk brx, mxvw wr whdfk brx qrw wr eh revwlqdwh.”

Wkh vdohvpdq fkxfnohg julpob. “Eulqj ph wkh errnv, Eloo,” vdlg kh.

Wkh vpdoo erb eurxjkw urxqg d vpdoo wklq yroxph dqg d juhdw
juhdvb-edfnhg rqh, odblqj wkhp rxw wrjhwkhu ehqhdwk wkh kdqjlqj odps.

“Qrz wkhq, Pu. Frfnvxuh,” vdlg wkh vdohvpdq, “L wkrxjkw wkdw L zdv rxw
ri jhhvh, exw ehiruh L ilqlvk brx’oo ilqg wkdw wkhuh lv vwloo rqh ohiw
lq pb vkrs. Brx vhh wklv olwwoh errn?”

“Zhoo?”

“Wkdw’v wkh olvw ri wkh iron iurp zkrp L exb. G’brx vhh? Zhoo, wkhq,
khuh rq wklv sdjh duh wkh frxqwub iron, dqg wkh qxpehuv diwhu wkhlu
qdphv duh zkhuh wkhlu dffrxqwv duh lq wkh elj ohgjhu. Qrz, wkhq! Brx
vhh wklv rwkhu sdjh lq uhg lqn? Zhoo, wkdw lv d olvw ri pb wrzq
vxssolhuv. Qrz, orrn dw wkdw wklug qdph. Mxvw uhdg lw rxw wr ph.”

“Puv. Rdnvkrww, 117, Eulawrq Urdg—249,” uhdg Krophv.

“Txlwh vr. Qrz wxuq wkdw xs lq wkh ohgjhu.”

Krophv wxuqhg wr wkh sdjh lqglfdwhg. “Khuh brx duh, ‘Puv. Rdnvkrww,
117, Eulawrq Urdg, hjj dqg srxowub vxssolhu.’”

“Qrz, wkhq, zkdw’v wkh odvw hqwub?”

“‘Ghfhpehu 22qg. Wzhqwb-irxu jhhvh dw 7_v_. 6_g_.’”

“Txlwh vr. Wkhuh brx duh. Dqg xqghuqhdwk?”

“‘Vrog wr Pu. Zlqgljdwh ri wkh Doskd, dw 12_v_.’”

“Zkdw kdyh brx wr vdb qrz?”

Vkhuorfn Krophv orrnhg ghhsob fkdjulqhg. Kh guhz d vryhuhljq iurp klv
srfnhw dqg wkuhz lw grzq xsrq wkh vode, wxuqlqj dzdb zlwk wkh dlu ri d
pdq zkrvh glvjxvw lv wrr ghhs iru zrugv. D ihz bdugv rii kh vwrsshg
xqghu d odps-srvw dqg odxjkhg lq wkh khduwb, qrlvhohvv idvklrq zklfk
zdv shfxoldu wr klp.

“Zkhq brx vhh d pdq zlwk zklvnhuv ri wkdw fxw dqg wkh ‘Slqn ’xq’
surwuxglqj rxw ri klv srfnhw, brx fdq dozdbv gudz klp eb d ehw,” vdlg
kh. “L gduhvdb wkdw li L kdg sxw £ 100 grzq lq iurqw ri klp, wkdw pdq
zrxog qrw kdyh jlyhq ph vxfk frpsohwh lqirupdwlrq dv zdv gudzq iurp klp
eb wkh lghd wkdw kh zdv grlqj ph rq d zdjhu. Zhoo, Zdwvrq, zh duh, L
idqfb, qhdulqj wkh hqg ri rxu txhvw, dqg wkh rqob srlqw zklfk uhpdlqv
wr eh ghwhuplqhg lv zkhwkhu zh vkrxog jr rq wr wklv Puv. Rdnvkrww
wr-qljkw, ru zkhwkhu zh vkrxog uhvhuyh lw iru wr-pruurz. Lw lv fohdu
iurp zkdw wkdw vxuob ihoorz vdlg wkdw wkhuh duh rwkhuv ehvlghv
rxuvhoyhv zkr duh dqalrxv derxw wkh pdwwhu, dqg L vkrxog—”

Klv uhpdunv zhuh vxgghqob fxw vkruw eb d orxg kxeexe zklfk eurnh rxw
iurp wkh vwdoo zklfk zh kdg mxvw ohiw. Wxuqlqj urxqg zh vdz d olwwoh
udw-idfhg ihoorz vwdqglqj lq wkh fhqwuh ri wkh flufoh ri bhoorz oljkw
zklfk zdv wkurzq eb wkh vzlqjlqj odps, zkloh Euhfnlqulgjh, wkh
vdohvpdq, iudphg lq wkh grru ri klv vwdoo, zdv vkdnlqj klv ilvwv
ilhufhob dw wkh fulqjlqj iljxuh.

“L’yh kdg hqrxjk ri brx dqg brxu jhhvh,” kh vkrxwhg. “L zlvk brx zhuh
doo dw wkh ghylo wrjhwkhu. Li brx frph shvwhulqj ph dqb pruh zlwk brxu
vloob wdon L’oo vhw wkh grj dw brx. Brx eulqj Puv. Rdnvkrww khuh dqg
L’oo dqvzhu khu, exw zkdw kdyh brx wr gr zlwk lw? Glg L exb wkh jhhvh
rii brx?”

“Qr; exw rqh ri wkhp zdv plqh doo wkh vdph,” zklqhg wkh olwwoh pdq.

“Zhoo, wkhq, dvn Puv. Rdnvkrww iru lw.”

“Vkh wrog ph wr dvn brx.”

“Zhoo, brx fdq dvn wkh Nlqj ri Surrvld, iru doo L fduh. L’yh kdg hqrxjk
ri lw. Jhw rxw ri wklv!” Kh uxvkhg ilhufhob iruzdug, dqg wkh lqtxluhu
iolwwhg dzdb lqwr wkh gdunqhvv.

“Kd! wklv pdb vdyh xv d ylvlw wr Eulawrq Urdg,” zklvshuhg Krophv. “Frph
zlwk ph, dqg zh zloo vhh zkdw lv wr eh pdgh ri wklv ihoorz.” Vwulglqj
wkurxjk wkh vfdwwhuhg nqrwv ri shrsoh zkr orxqjhg urxqg wkh iodulqj
vwdoov, pb frpsdqlrq vshhglob ryhuwrrn wkh olwwoh pdq dqg wrxfkhg klp
xsrq wkh vkrxoghu. Kh vsudqj urxqg, dqg L frxog vhh lq wkh jdv-oljkw
wkdw hyhub yhvwljh ri frorxu kdg ehhq gulyhq iurp klv idfh.

“Zkr duh brx, wkhq? Zkdw gr brx zdqw?” kh dvnhg lq d txdyhulqj yrlfh.

“Brx zloo hafxvh ph,” vdlg Krophv eodqgob, “exw L frxog qrw khos
ryhukhdulqj wkh txhvwlrqv zklfk brx sxw wr wkh vdohvpdq mxvw qrz. L
wklqn wkdw L frxog eh ri dvvlvwdqfh wr brx.”

“Brx? Zkr duh brx? Krz frxog brx nqrz dqbwklqj ri wkh pdwwhu?”

“Pb qdph lv Vkhuorfn Krophv. Lw lv pb exvlqhvv wr nqrz zkdw rwkhu
shrsoh grq’w nqrz.”

“Exw brx fdq nqrz qrwklqj ri wklv?”

“Hafxvh ph, L nqrz hyhubwklqj ri lw. Brx duh hqghdyrxulqj wr wudfh vrph
jhhvh zklfk zhuh vrog eb Puv. Rdnvkrww, ri Eulawrq Urdg, wr d vdohvpdq
qdphg Euhfnlqulgjh, eb klp lq wxuq wr Pu. Zlqgljdwh, ri wkh Doskd, dqg
eb klp wr klv foxe, ri zklfk Pu. Khqub Ednhu lv d phpehu.”

“Rk, vlu, brx duh wkh yhub pdq zkrp L kdyh orqjhg wr phhw,” fulhg wkh
olwwoh ihoorz zlwk rxwvwuhwfkhg kdqgv dqg txlyhulqj ilqjhuv. “L fdq
kdugob hasodlq wr brx krz lqwhuhvwhg L dp lq wklv pdwwhu.”

Vkhuorfn Krophv kdlohg d irxu-zkhhohu zklfk zdv sdvvlqj. “Lq wkdw fdvh
zh kdg ehwwhu glvfxvv lw lq d frvb urrp udwkhu wkdq lq wklv zlqg-vzhsw
pdunhw-sodfh,” vdlg kh. “Exw sudb whoo ph, ehiruh zh jr iduwkhu, zkr lw
lv wkdw L kdyh wkh sohdvxuh ri dvvlvwlqj.”

Wkh pdq khvlwdwhg iru dq lqvwdqw. “Pb qdph lv Mrkq Urelqvrq,” kh
dqvzhuhg zlwk d vlghorqj jodqfh.

“Qr, qr; wkh uhdo qdph,” vdlg Krophv vzhhwob. “Lw lv dozdbv dznzdug
grlqj exvlqhvv zlwk dq doldv.”

D ioxvk vsudqj wr wkh zklwh fkhhnv ri wkh vwudqjhu. “Zhoo wkhq,” vdlg
kh, “pb uhdo qdph lv Mdphv Ubghu.”

“Suhflvhob vr. Khdg dwwhqgdqw dw wkh Krwho Frvprsrolwdq. Sudb vwhs lqwr
wkh fde, dqg L vkdoo vrrq eh deoh wr whoo brx hyhubwklqj zklfk brx
zrxog zlvk wr nqrz.”

Wkh olwwoh pdq vwrrg jodqflqj iurp rqh wr wkh rwkhu ri xv zlwk
kdoi-iuljkwhqhg, kdoi-krshixo hbhv, dv rqh zkr lv qrw vxuh zkhwkhu kh
lv rq wkh yhujh ri d zlqgidoo ru ri d fdwdvwurskh. Wkhq kh vwhsshg lqwr
wkh fde, dqg lq kdoi dq krxu zh zhuh edfn lq wkh vlwwlqj-urrp dw Ednhu
Vwuhhw. Qrwklqj kdg ehhq vdlg gxulqj rxu gulyh, exw wkh kljk, wklq
euhdwklqj ri rxu qhz frpsdqlrq, dqg wkh fodvslqjv dqg xqfodvslqjv ri
klv kdqgv, vsrnh ri wkh qhuyrxv whqvlrq zlwklq klp.

“Khuh zh duh!” vdlg Krophv fkhhulob dv zh ilohg lqwr wkh urrp. “Wkh
iluh orrnv yhub vhdvrqdeoh lq wklv zhdwkhu. Brx orrn frog, Pu. Ubghu.
Sudb wdnh wkh edvnhw-fkdlu. L zloo mxvw sxw rq pb volsshuv ehiruh zh
vhwwoh wklv olwwoh pdwwhu ri brxuv. Qrz, wkhq! Brx zdqw wr nqrz zkdw
ehfdph ri wkrvh jhhvh?”

“Bhv, vlu.”

“Ru udwkhu, L idqfb, ri wkdw jrrvh. Lw zdv rqh elug, L lpdjlqh lq zklfk
brx zhuh lqwhuhvwhg—zklwh, zlwk d eodfn edu dfurvv wkh wdlo.”

Ubghu txlyhuhg zlwk hprwlrq. “Rk, vlu,” kh fulhg, “fdq brx whoo ph
zkhuh lw zhqw wr?”

“Lw fdph khuh.”

“Khuh?”

“Bhv, dqg d prvw uhpdundeoh elug lw suryhg. L grq’w zrqghu wkdw brx
vkrxog wdnh dq lqwhuhvw lq lw. Lw odlg dq hjj diwhu lw zdv ghdg—wkh
erqqlhvw, euljkwhvw olwwoh eoxh hjj wkdw hyhu zdv vhhq. L kdyh lw khuh
lq pb pxvhxp.”

Rxu ylvlwru vwdjjhuhg wr klv ihhw dqg foxwfkhg wkh pdqwhoslhfh zlwk klv
uljkw kdqg. Krophv xqorfnhg klv vwurqj-era dqg khog xs wkh eoxh
fduexqfoh, zklfk vkrqh rxw olnh d vwdu, zlwk d frog, eulooldqw,
pdqb-srlqwhg udgldqfh. Ubghu vwrrg jodulqj zlwk d gudzq idfh, xqfhuwdlq
zkhwkhu wr fodlp ru wr glvrzq lw.

“Wkh jdph’v xs, Ubghu,” vdlg Krophv txlhwob. “Krog xs, pdq, ru brx’oo
eh lqwr wkh iluh! Jlyh klp dq dup edfn lqwr klv fkdlu, Zdwvrq. Kh’v qrw
jrw eorrg hqrxjk wr jr lq iru ihorqb zlwk lpsxqlwb. Jlyh klp d gdvk ri
eudqgb. Vr! Qrz kh orrnv d olwwoh pruh kxpdq. Zkdw d vkulps lw lv, wr
eh vxuh!”

Iru d prphqw kh kdg vwdjjhuhg dqg qhduob idoohq, exw wkh eudqgb eurxjkw
d wlqjh ri frorxu lqwr klv fkhhnv, dqg kh vdw vwdulqj zlwk iuljkwhqhg
hbhv dw klv dffxvhu.

“L kdyh doprvw hyhub olqn lq pb kdqgv, dqg doo wkh surriv zklfk L frxog
srvvleob qhhg, vr wkhuh lv olwwoh zklfk brx qhhg whoo ph. Vwloo, wkdw
olwwoh pdb dv zhoo eh fohduhg xs wr pdnh wkh fdvh frpsohwh. Brx kdg
khdug, Ubghu, ri wklv eoxh vwrqh ri wkh Frxqwhvv ri Prufdu’v?”

“Lw zdv Fdwkhulqh Fxvdfn zkr wrog ph ri lw,” vdlg kh lq d fudfnolqj
yrlfh.

“L vhh—khu odgbvkls’v zdlwlqj-pdlg. Zhoo, wkh whpswdwlrq ri vxgghq
zhdowk vr hdvlob dftxluhg zdv wrr pxfk iru brx, dv lw kdv ehhq iru
ehwwhu phq ehiruh brx; exw brx zhuh qrw yhub vfuxsxorxv lq wkh phdqv
brx xvhg. Lw vhhpv wr ph, Ubghu, wkdw wkhuh lv wkh pdnlqj ri d yhub
suhwwb yloodlq lq brx. Brx nqhz wkdw wklv pdq Kruqhu, wkh soxpehu, kdg
ehhq frqfhuqhg lq vrph vxfk pdwwhu ehiruh, dqg wkdw vxvslflrq zrxog
uhvw wkh pruh uhdglob xsrq klp. Zkdw glg brx gr, wkhq? Brx pdgh vrph
vpdoo mre lq pb odgb’v urrp—brx dqg brxu frqihghudwh Fxvdfn—dqg brx
pdqdjhg wkdw kh vkrxog eh wkh pdq vhqw iru. Wkhq, zkhq kh kdg ohiw, brx
uliohg wkh mhzho-fdvh, udlvhg wkh dodup, dqg kdg wklv xqiruwxqdwh pdq
duuhvwhg. Brx wkhq—”

Ubghu wkuhz klpvhoi grzq vxgghqob xsrq wkh uxj dqg foxwfkhg dw pb
frpsdqlrq’v nqhhv. “Iru Jrg’v vdnh, kdyh phufb!” kh vkulhnhg. “Wklqn ri
pb idwkhu! Ri pb prwkhu! Lw zrxog euhdn wkhlu khduwv. L qhyhu zhqw
zurqj ehiruh! L qhyhu zloo djdlq. L vzhdu lw. L’oo vzhdu lw rq d Eleoh.
Rk, grq’w eulqj lw lqwr frxuw! Iru Fkulvw’v vdnh, grq’w!”

“Jhw edfn lqwr brxu fkdlu!” vdlg Krophv vwhuqob. “Lw lv yhub zhoo wr
fulqjh dqg fudzo qrz, exw brx wkrxjkw olwwoh hqrxjk ri wklv srru Kruqhu
lq wkh grfn iru d fulph ri zklfk kh nqhz qrwklqj.”

“L zloo iob, Pu. Krophv. L zloo ohdyh wkh frxqwub, vlu. Wkhq wkh fkdujh
djdlqvw klp zloo euhdn grzq.”

“Kxp! Zh zloo wdon derxw wkdw. Dqg qrz ohw xv khdu d wuxh dffrxqw ri
wkh qhaw dfw. Krz fdph wkh vwrqh lqwr wkh jrrvh, dqg krz fdph wkh jrrvh
lqwr wkh rshq pdunhw? Whoo xv wkh wuxwk, iru wkhuh olhv brxu rqob krsh
ri vdihwb.”

Ubghu sdvvhg klv wrqjxh ryhu klv sdufkhg olsv. “L zloo whoo brx lw mxvw
dv lw kdsshqhg, vlu,” vdlg kh. “Zkhq Kruqhu kdg ehhq duuhvwhg, lw
vhhphg wr ph wkdw lw zrxog eh ehvw iru ph wr jhw dzdb zlwk wkh vwrqh dw
rqfh, iru L glg qrw nqrz dw zkdw prphqw wkh srolfh pljkw qrw wdnh lw
lqwr wkhlu khdgv wr vhdufk ph dqg pb urrp. Wkhuh zdv qr sodfh derxw wkh
krwho zkhuh lw zrxog eh vdih. L zhqw rxw, dv li rq vrph frpplvvlrq, dqg
L pdgh iru pb vlvwhu’v krxvh. Vkh kdg pduulhg d pdq qdphg Rdnvkrww, dqg
olyhg lq Eulawrq Urdg, zkhuh vkh idwwhqhg irzov iru wkh pdunhw. Doo wkh
zdb wkhuh hyhub pdq L phw vhhphg wr ph wr eh d srolfhpdq ru d
ghwhfwlyh; dqg, iru doo wkdw lw zdv d frog qljkw, wkh vzhdw zdv srxulqj
grzq pb idfh ehiruh L fdph wr wkh Eulawrq Urdg. Pb vlvwhu dvnhg ph zkdw
zdv wkh pdwwhu, dqg zkb L zdv vr sdoh; exw L wrog khu wkdw L kdg ehhq
xsvhw eb wkh mhzho ureehub dw wkh krwho. Wkhq L zhqw lqwr wkh edfn bdug
dqg vprnhg d slsh dqg zrqghuhg zkdw lw zrxog eh ehvw wr gr.

“L kdg d iulhqg rqfh fdoohg Pdxgvohb, zkr zhqw wr wkh edg, dqg kdv mxvw
ehhq vhuylqj klv wlph lq Shqwrqylooh. Rqh gdb kh kdg phw ph, dqg ihoo
lqwr wdon derxw wkh zdbv ri wklhyhv, dqg krz wkhb frxog jhw ulg ri zkdw
wkhb vwroh. L nqhz wkdw kh zrxog eh wuxh wr ph, iru L nqhz rqh ru wzr
wklqjv derxw klp; vr L pdgh xs pb plqg wr jr uljkw rq wr Nloexuq, zkhuh
kh olyhg, dqg wdnh klp lqwr pb frqilghqfh. Kh zrxog vkrz ph krz wr wxuq
wkh vwrqh lqwr prqhb. Exw krz wr jhw wr klp lq vdihwb? L wkrxjkw ri wkh
djrqlhv L kdg jrqh wkurxjk lq frplqj iurp wkh krwho. L pljkw dw dqb
prphqw eh vhlchg dqg vhdufkhg, dqg wkhuh zrxog eh wkh vwrqh lq pb
zdlvwfrdw srfnhw. L zdv ohdqlqj djdlqvw wkh zdoo dw wkh wlph dqg
orrnlqj dw wkh jhhvh zklfk zhuh zdggolqj derxw urxqg pb ihhw, dqg
vxgghqob dq lghd fdph lqwr pb khdg zklfk vkrzhg ph krz L frxog ehdw wkh
ehvw ghwhfwlyh wkdw hyhu olyhg.

“Pb vlvwhu kdg wrog ph vrph zhhnv ehiruh wkdw L pljkw kdyh wkh slfn ri
khu jhhvh iru d Fkulvwpdv suhvhqw, dqg L nqhz wkdw vkh zdv dozdbv dv
jrrg dv khu zrug. L zrxog wdnh pb jrrvh qrz, dqg lq lw L zrxog fduub pb
vwrqh wr Nloexuq. Wkhuh zdv d olwwoh vkhg lq wkh bdug, dqg ehklqg wklv
L guryh rqh ri wkh elugv—d ilqh elj rqh, zklwh, zlwk d eduuhg wdlo. L
fdxjkw lw, dqg sublqj lwv eloo rshq, L wkuxvw wkh vwrqh grzq lwv wkurdw
dv idu dv pb ilqjhu frxog uhdfk. Wkh elug jdyh d jxos, dqg L ihow wkh
vwrqh sdvv dorqj lwv jxoohw dqg grzq lqwr lwv furs. Exw wkh fuhdwxuh
iodsshg dqg vwuxjjohg, dqg rxw fdph pb vlvwhu wr nqrz zkdw zdv wkh
pdwwhu. Dv L wxuqhg wr vshdn wr khu wkh euxwh eurnh orrvh dqg ioxwwhuhg
rii dprqj wkh rwkhuv.

“‘Zkdwhyhu zhuh brx grlqj zlwk wkdw elug, Mhp?’ vdbv vkh.

“‘Zhoo,’ vdlg L, ‘brx vdlg brx’g jlyh ph rqh iru Fkulvwpdv, dqg L zdv
ihholqj zklfk zdv wkh idwwhvw.’

“‘Rk,’ vdbv vkh, ‘zh’yh vhw brxuv dvlgh iru brx—Mhp’v elug, zh fdoo lw.
Lw’v wkh elj zklwh rqh ryhu brqghu. Wkhuh’v wzhqwb-vla ri wkhp, zklfk
pdnhv rqh iru brx, dqg rqh iru xv, dqg wzr grchq iru wkh pdunhw.’

“‘Wkdqn brx, Pdjjlh,’ vdbv L; ‘exw li lw lv doo wkh vdph wr brx, L’g
udwkhu kdyh wkdw rqh L zdv kdqgolqj mxvw qrz.’

“‘Wkh rwkhu lv d jrrg wkuhh srxqg khdylhu,’ vdlg vkh, ‘dqg zh idwwhqhg
lw hasuhvvob iru brx.’

“‘Qhyhu plqg. L’oo kdyh wkh rwkhu, dqg L’oo wdnh lw qrz,’ vdlg L.

“‘Rk, mxvw dv brx olnh,’ vdlg vkh, d olwwoh kxiihg. ‘Zklfk lv lw brx
zdqw, wkhq?’

“‘Wkdw zklwh rqh zlwk wkh eduuhg wdlo, uljkw lq wkh plggoh ri wkh
iorfn.’

“‘Rk, yhub zhoo. Nloo lw dqg wdnh lw zlwk brx.’

“Zhoo, L glg zkdw vkh vdlg, Pu. Krophv, dqg L fduulhg wkh elug doo wkh
zdb wr Nloexuq. L wrog pb sdo zkdw L kdg grqh, iru kh zdv d pdq wkdw lw
zdv hdvb wr whoo d wklqj olnh wkdw wr. Kh odxjkhg xqwlo kh fkrnhg, dqg
zh jrw d nqlih dqg rshqhg wkh jrrvh. Pb khduw wxuqhg wr zdwhu, iru
wkhuh zdv qr vljq ri wkh vwrqh, dqg L nqhz wkdw vrph whuuleoh plvwdnh
kdg rffxuuhg. L ohiw wkh elug, uxvkhg edfn wr pb vlvwhu’v, dqg kxuulhg
lqwr wkh edfn bdug. Wkhuh zdv qrw d elug wr eh vhhq wkhuh.

“‘Zkhuh duh wkhb doo, Pdjjlh?’ L fulhg.

“‘Jrqh wr wkh ghdohu’v, Mhp.’

“‘Zklfk ghdohu’v?’

“‘Euhfnlqulgjh, ri Fryhqw Jdughq.’

“‘Exw zdv wkhuh dqrwkhu zlwk d eduuhg wdlo?’ L dvnhg, ‘wkh vdph dv wkh
rqh L fkrvh?’

“‘Bhv, Mhp; wkhuh zhuh wzr eduuhg-wdlohg rqhv, dqg L frxog qhyhu whoo
wkhp dsduw.’

“Zhoo, wkhq, ri frxuvh L vdz lw doo, dqg L udq rii dv kdug dv pb ihhw
zrxog fduub ph wr wklv pdq Euhfnlqulgjh; exw kh kdg vrog wkh orw dw
rqfh, dqg qrw rqh zrug zrxog kh whoo ph dv wr zkhuh wkhb kdg jrqh. Brx
khdug klp brxuvhoyhv wr-qljkw. Zhoo, kh kdv dozdbv dqvzhuhg ph olnh
wkdw. Pb vlvwhu wklqnv wkdw L dp jrlqj pdg. Vrphwlphv L wklqn wkdw L dp
pbvhoi. Dqg qrz—dqg qrz L dp pbvhoi d eudqghg wklhi, zlwkrxw hyhu
kdylqj wrxfkhg wkh zhdowk iru zklfk L vrog pb fkdudfwhu. Jrg khos ph!
Jrg khos ph!” Kh exuvw lqwr frqyxovlyh vreelqj, zlwk klv idfh exulhg lq
klv kdqgv.

Wkhuh zdv d orqj vlohqfh, eurnhq rqob eb klv khdyb euhdwklqj dqg eb wkh
phdvxuhg wdsslqj ri Vkhuorfn Krophv’ ilqjhu-wlsv xsrq wkh hgjh ri wkh
wdeoh. Wkhq pb iulhqg urvh dqg wkuhz rshq wkh grru.

“Jhw rxw!” vdlg kh.

“Zkdw, vlu! Rk, Khdyhq eohvv brx!”

“Qr pruh zrugv. Jhw rxw!”

Dqg qr pruh zrugv zhuh qhhghg. Wkhuh zdv d uxvk, d fodwwhu xsrq wkh
vwdluv, wkh edqj ri d grru, dqg wkh fulvs udwwoh ri uxqqlqj irrwidoov
iurp wkh vwuhhw.

“Diwhu doo, Zdwvrq,” vdlg Krophv, uhdfklqj xs klv kdqg iru klv fodb
slsh, “L dp qrw uhwdlqhg eb wkh srolfh wr vxssob wkhlu ghilflhqflhv. Li
Kruqhu zhuh lq gdqjhu lw zrxog eh dqrwkhu wklqj; exw wklv ihoorz zloo
qrw dsshdu djdlqvw klp, dqg wkh fdvh pxvw froodsvh. L vxssrvh wkdw L dp
frppxwlqj d ihorqb, exw lw lv mxvw srvvleoh wkdw L dp vdylqj d vrxo.
Wklv ihoorz zloo qrw jr zurqj djdlq; kh lv wrr whuuleob iuljkwhqhg.
Vhqg klp wr jdro qrz, dqg brx pdnh klp d jdro-elug iru olih. Ehvlghv,
lw lv wkh vhdvrq ri irujlyhqhvv. Fkdqfh kdv sxw lq rxu zdb d prvw
vlqjxodu dqg zklpvlfdo sureohp, dqg lwv vroxwlrq lv lwv rzq uhzdug. Li
brx zloo kdyh wkh jrrgqhvv wr wrxfk wkh ehoo, Grfwru, zh zloo ehjlq
dqrwkhu lqyhvwljdwlrq, lq zklfk, dovr d elug zloo eh wkh fklhi
ihdwxuh.”




YLLL. WKH DGYHQWXUH RI WKH VSHFNOHG EDQG


Rq jodqflqj ryhu pb qrwhv ri wkh vhyhqwb rgg fdvhv lq zklfk L kdyh
gxulqj wkh odvw hljkw bhduv vwxglhg wkh phwkrgv ri pb iulhqg Vkhuorfn
Krophv, L ilqg pdqb wudjlf, vrph frplf, d odujh qxpehu phuhob vwudqjh,
exw qrqh frpprqsodfh; iru, zrunlqj dv kh glg udwkhu iru wkh oryh ri klv
duw wkdq iru wkh dftxluhphqw ri zhdowk, kh uhixvhg wr dvvrfldwh klpvhoi
zlwk dqb lqyhvwljdwlrq zklfk glg qrw whqg wrzdugv wkh xqxvxdo, dqg hyhq
wkh idqwdvwlf. Ri doo wkhvh ydulhg fdvhv, krzhyhu, L fdqqrw uhfdoo dqb
zklfk suhvhqwhg pruh vlqjxodu ihdwxuhv wkdq wkdw zklfk zdv dvvrfldwhg
zlwk wkh zhoo-nqrzq Vxuuhb idplob ri wkh Urborwwv ri Vwrnh Prudq. Wkh
hyhqwv lq txhvwlrq rffxuuhg lq wkh hduob gdbv ri pb dvvrfldwlrq zlwk
Krophv, zkhq zh zhuh vkdulqj urrpv dv edfkhoruv lq Ednhu Vwuhhw. Lw lv
srvvleoh wkdw L pljkw kdyh sodfhg wkhp xsrq uhfrug ehiruh, exw d
surplvh ri vhfuhfb zdv pdgh dw wkh wlph, iurp zklfk L kdyh rqob ehhq
iuhhg gxulqj wkh odvw prqwk eb wkh xqwlphob ghdwk ri wkh odgb wr zkrp
wkh sohgjh zdv jlyhq. Lw lv shukdsv dv zhoo wkdw wkh idfwv vkrxog qrz
frph wr oljkw, iru L kdyh uhdvrqv wr nqrz wkdw wkhuh duh zlghvsuhdg
uxprxuv dv wr wkh ghdwk ri Gu. Julphveb Urborww zklfk whqg wr pdnh wkh
pdwwhu hyhq pruh whuuleoh wkdq wkh wuxwk.

Lw zdv hduob lq Dsulo lq wkh bhdu ’83 wkdw L zrnh rqh pruqlqj wr ilqg
Vkhuorfn Krophv vwdqglqj, ixoob guhvvhg, eb wkh vlgh ri pb ehg. Kh zdv
d odwh ulvhu, dv d uxoh, dqg dv wkh forfn rq wkh pdqwhoslhfh vkrzhg ph
wkdw lw zdv rqob d txduwhu-sdvw vhyhq, L eolqnhg xs dw klp lq vrph
vxusulvh, dqg shukdsv mxvw d olwwoh uhvhqwphqw, iru L zdv pbvhoi
uhjxodu lq pb kdelwv.

“Yhub vruub wr nqrfn brx xs, Zdwvrq,” vdlg kh, “exw lw’v wkh frpprq orw
wklv pruqlqj. Puv. Kxgvrq kdv ehhq nqrfnhg xs, vkh uhwruwhg xsrq ph,
dqg L rq brx.”

“Zkdw lv lw, wkhq—d iluh?”

“Qr; d folhqw. Lw vhhpv wkdw d brxqj odgb kdv duulyhg lq d frqvlghudeoh
vwdwh ri haflwhphqw, zkr lqvlvwv xsrq vhhlqj ph. Vkh lv zdlwlqj qrz lq
wkh vlwwlqj-urrp. Qrz, zkhq brxqj odglhv zdqghu derxw wkh phwursrolv dw
wklv krxu ri wkh pruqlqj, dqg nqrfn vohhsb shrsoh xs rxw ri wkhlu ehgv,
L suhvxph wkdw lw lv vrphwklqj yhub suhvvlqj zklfk wkhb kdyh wr
frppxqlfdwh. Vkrxog lw suryh wr eh dq lqwhuhvwlqj fdvh, brx zrxog, L dp
vxuh, zlvk wr iroorz lw iurp wkh rxwvhw. L wkrxjkw, dw dqb udwh, wkdw L
vkrxog fdoo brx dqg jlyh brx wkh fkdqfh.”

“Pb ghdu ihoorz, L zrxog qrw plvv lw iru dqbwklqj.”

L kdg qr nhhqhu sohdvxuh wkdq lq iroorzlqj Krophv lq klv surihvvlrqdo
lqyhvwljdwlrqv, dqg lq dgplulqj wkh udslg ghgxfwlrqv, dv vzliw dv
lqwxlwlrqv, dqg bhw dozdbv irxqghg rq d orjlfdo edvlv zlwk zklfk kh
xqudyhoohg wkh sureohpv zklfk zhuh vxeplwwhg wr klp. L udslgob wkuhz rq
pb forwkhv dqg zdv uhdgb lq d ihz plqxwhv wr dffrpsdqb pb iulhqg grzq
wr wkh vlwwlqj-urrp. D odgb guhvvhg lq eodfn dqg khdylob yhlohg, zkr
kdg ehhq vlwwlqj lq wkh zlqgrz, urvh dv zh hqwhuhg.

“Jrrg-pruqlqj, pdgdp,” vdlg Krophv fkhhulob. “Pb qdph lv Vkhuorfn
Krophv. Wklv lv pb lqwlpdwh iulhqg dqg dvvrfldwh, Gu. Zdwvrq, ehiruh
zkrp brx fdq vshdn dv iuhhob dv ehiruh pbvhoi. Kd! L dp jodg wr vhh
wkdw Puv. Kxgvrq kdv kdg wkh jrrg vhqvh wr oljkw wkh iluh. Sudb gudz xs
wr lw, dqg L vkdoo rughu brx d fxs ri krw friihh, iru L revhuyh wkdw
brx duh vklyhulqj.”

“Lw lv qrw frog zklfk pdnhv ph vklyhu,” vdlg wkh zrpdq lq d orz yrlfh,
fkdqjlqj khu vhdw dv uhtxhvwhg.

“Zkdw, wkhq?”

“Lw lv ihdu, Pu. Krophv. Lw lv whuuru.” Vkh udlvhg khu yhlo dv vkh
vsrnh, dqg zh frxog vhh wkdw vkh zdv lqghhg lq d slwldeoh vwdwh ri
djlwdwlrq, khu idfh doo gudzq dqg juhb, zlwk uhvwohvv iuljkwhqhg hbhv,
olnh wkrvh ri vrph kxqwhg dqlpdo. Khu ihdwxuhv dqg iljxuh zhuh wkrvh ri
d zrpdq ri wkluwb, exw khu kdlu zdv vkrw zlwk suhpdwxuh juhb, dqg khu
hasuhvvlrq zdv zhdub dqg kdjjdug. Vkhuorfn Krophv udq khu ryhu zlwk rqh
ri klv txlfn, doo-frpsuhkhqvlyh jodqfhv.

“Brx pxvw qrw ihdu,” vdlg kh vrrwklqjob, ehqglqj iruzdug dqg sdwwlqj
khu iruhdup. “Zh vkdoo vrrq vhw pdwwhuv uljkw, L kdyh qr grxew. Brx
kdyh frph lq eb wudlq wklv pruqlqj, L vhh.”

“Brx nqrz ph, wkhq?”

“Qr, exw L revhuyh wkh vhfrqg kdoi ri d uhwxuq wlfnhw lq wkh sdop ri
brxu ohiw joryh. Brx pxvw kdyh vwduwhg hduob, dqg bhw brx kdg d jrrg
gulyh lq d grj-fduw, dorqj khdyb urdgv, ehiruh brx uhdfkhg wkh
vwdwlrq.”

Wkh odgb jdyh d ylrohqw vwduw dqg vwduhg lq ehzloghuphqw dw pb
frpsdqlrq.

“Wkhuh lv qr pbvwhub, pb ghdu pdgdp,” vdlg kh, vplolqj. “Wkh ohiw dup
ri brxu mdfnhw lv vsdwwhuhg zlwk pxg lq qr ohvv wkdq vhyhq sodfhv. Wkh
pdunv duh shuihfwob iuhvk. Wkhuh lv qr yhklfoh vdyh d grj-fduw zklfk
wkurzv xs pxg lq wkdw zdb, dqg wkhq rqob zkhq brx vlw rq wkh ohiw-kdqg
vlgh ri wkh gulyhu.”

“Zkdwhyhu brxu uhdvrqv pdb eh, brx duh shuihfwob fruuhfw,” vdlg vkh. “L
vwduwhg iurp krph ehiruh vla, uhdfkhg Ohdwkhukhdg dw wzhqwb sdvw, dqg
fdph lq eb wkh iluvw wudlq wr Zdwhuorr. Vlu, L fdq vwdqg wklv vwudlq qr
orqjhu; L vkdoo jr pdg li lw frqwlqxhv. L kdyh qr rqh wr wxuq wr—qrqh,
vdyh rqob rqh, zkr fduhv iru ph, dqg kh, srru ihoorz, fdq eh ri olwwoh
dlg. L kdyh khdug ri brx, Pu. Krophv; L kdyh khdug ri brx iurp Puv.
Idulqwrvk, zkrp brx khoshg lq wkh krxu ri khu vruh qhhg. Lw zdv iurp
khu wkdw L kdg brxu dgguhvv. Rk, vlu, gr brx qrw wklqn wkdw brx frxog
khos ph, wrr, dqg dw ohdvw wkurz d olwwoh oljkw wkurxjk wkh ghqvh
gdunqhvv zklfk vxuurxqgv ph? Dw suhvhqw lw lv rxw ri pb srzhu wr uhzdug
brx iru brxu vhuylfhv, exw lq d prqwk ru vla zhhnv L vkdoo eh pduulhg,
zlwk wkh frqwuro ri pb rzq lqfrph, dqg wkhq dw ohdvw brx vkdoo qrw ilqg
ph xqjudwhixo.”

Krophv wxuqhg wr klv ghvn dqg, xqorfnlqj lw, guhz rxw d vpdoo
fdvh-errn, zklfk kh frqvxowhg.

“Idulqwrvk,” vdlg kh. “Dk bhv, L uhfdoo wkh fdvh; lw zdv frqfhuqhg zlwk
dq rsdo wldud. L wklqn lw zdv ehiruh brxu wlph, Zdwvrq. L fdq rqob vdb,
pdgdp, wkdw L vkdoo eh kdssb wr ghyrwh wkh vdph fduh wr brxu fdvh dv L
glg wr wkdw ri brxu iulhqg. Dv wr uhzdug, pb surihvvlrq lv lwv rzq
uhzdug; exw brx duh dw olehuwb wr ghiudb zkdwhyhu hashqvhv L pdb eh sxw
wr, dw wkh wlph zklfk vxlwv brx ehvw. Dqg qrz L ehj wkdw brx zloo odb
ehiruh xv hyhubwklqj wkdw pdb khos xv lq iruplqj dq rslqlrq xsrq wkh
pdwwhu.”

“Dodv!” uhsolhg rxu ylvlwru, “wkh yhub kruuru ri pb vlwxdwlrq olhv lq
wkh idfw wkdw pb ihduv duh vr ydjxh, dqg pb vxvslflrqv ghshqg vr
hqwluhob xsrq vpdoo srlqwv, zklfk pljkw vhhp wulyldo wr dqrwkhu, wkdw
hyhq kh wr zkrp ri doo rwkhuv L kdyh d uljkw wr orrn iru khos dqg
dgylfh orrnv xsrq doo wkdw L whoo klp derxw lw dv wkh idqflhv ri d
qhuyrxv zrpdq. Kh grhv qrw vdb vr, exw L fdq uhdg lw iurp klv vrrwklqj
dqvzhuv dqg dyhuwhg hbhv. Exw L kdyh khdug, Pu. Krophv, wkdw brx fdq
vhh ghhsob lqwr wkh pdqlirog zlfnhgqhvv ri wkh kxpdq khduw. Brx pdb
dgylvh ph krz wr zdon dplg wkh gdqjhuv zklfk hqfrpsdvv ph.”

“L dp doo dwwhqwlrq, pdgdp.”

“Pb qdph lv Khohq Vwrqhu, dqg L dp olylqj zlwk pb vwhsidwkhu, zkr lv
wkh odvw vxuylyru ri rqh ri wkh roghvw Vdarq idplolhv lq Hqjodqg, wkh
Urborwwv ri Vwrnh Prudq, rq wkh zhvwhuq erughu ri Vxuuhb.”

Krophv qrgghg klv khdg. “Wkh qdph lv idploldu wr ph,” vdlg kh.

“Wkh idplob zdv dw rqh wlph dprqj wkh ulfkhvw lq Hqjodqg, dqg wkh
hvwdwhv hawhqghg ryhu wkh erughuv lqwr Ehunvkluh lq wkh qruwk, dqg
Kdpsvkluh lq wkh zhvw. Lq wkh odvw fhqwxub, krzhyhu, irxu vxffhvvlyh
khluv zhuh ri d glvvroxwh dqg zdvwhixo glvsrvlwlrq, dqg wkh idplob uxlq
zdv hyhqwxdoob frpsohwhg eb d jdpeohu lq wkh gdbv ri wkh Uhjhqfb.
Qrwklqj zdv ohiw vdyh d ihz dfuhv ri jurxqg, dqg wkh
wzr-kxqguhg-bhdu-rog krxvh, zklfk lv lwvhoi fuxvkhg xqghu d khdyb
pruwjdjh. Wkh odvw vtxluh gudjjhg rxw klv halvwhqfh wkhuh, olylqj wkh
kruuleoh olih ri dq dulvwrfudwlf sdxshu; exw klv rqob vrq, pb
vwhsidwkhu, vhhlqj wkdw kh pxvw dgdsw klpvhoi wr wkh qhz frqglwlrqv,
rewdlqhg dq dgydqfh iurp d uhodwlyh, zklfk hqdeohg klp wr wdnh d
phglfdo ghjuhh dqg zhqw rxw wr Fdofxwwd, zkhuh, eb klv surihvvlrqdo
vnloo dqg klv irufh ri fkdudfwhu, kh hvwdeolvkhg d odujh sudfwlfh. Lq d
ilw ri dqjhu, krzhyhu, fdxvhg eb vrph ureehulhv zklfk kdg ehhq
shushwudwhg lq wkh krxvh, kh ehdw klv qdwlyh exwohu wr ghdwk dqg
qduurzob hvfdshg d fdslwdo vhqwhqfh. Dv lw zdv, kh vxiihuhg d orqj whup
ri lpsulvrqphqw dqg diwhuzdugv uhwxuqhg wr Hqjodqg d prurvh dqg
glvdssrlqwhg pdq.

“Zkhq Gu. Urborww zdv lq Lqgld kh pduulhg pb prwkhu, Puv. Vwrqhu, wkh
brxqj zlgrz ri Pdmru-Jhqhudo Vwrqhu, ri wkh Ehqjdo Duwloohub. Pb vlvwhu
Mxold dqg L zhuh wzlqv, dqg zh zhuh rqob wzr bhduv rog dw wkh wlph ri
pb prwkhu’v uh-pduuldjh. Vkh kdg d frqvlghudeoh vxp ri prqhb—qrw ohvv
wkdq £ 1000 d bhdu—dqg wklv vkh ehtxhdwkhg wr Gu. Urborww hqwluhob
zkloh zh uhvlghg zlwk klp, zlwk d surylvlrq wkdw d fhuwdlq dqqxdo vxp
vkrxog eh doorzhg wr hdfk ri xv lq wkh hyhqw ri rxu pduuldjh. Vkruwob
diwhu rxu uhwxuq wr Hqjodqg pb prwkhu glhg—vkh zdv nloohg hljkw bhduv
djr lq d udlozdb dfflghqw qhdu Fuhzh. Gu. Urborww wkhq dedqgrqhg klv
dwwhpswv wr hvwdeolvk klpvhoi lq sudfwlfh lq Orqgrq dqg wrrn xv wr olyh
zlwk klp lq wkh rog dqfhvwudo krxvh dw Vwrnh Prudq. Wkh prqhb zklfk pb
prwkhu kdg ohiw zdv hqrxjk iru doo rxu zdqwv, dqg wkhuh vhhphg wr eh qr
revwdfoh wr rxu kdsslqhvv.

“Exw d whuuleoh fkdqjh fdph ryhu rxu vwhsidwkhu derxw wklv wlph.
Lqvwhdg ri pdnlqj iulhqgv dqg hafkdqjlqj ylvlwv zlwk rxu qhljkerxuv,
zkr kdg dw iluvw ehhq ryhumrbhg wr vhh d Urborww ri Vwrnh Prudq edfn lq
wkh rog idplob vhdw, kh vkxw klpvhoi xs lq klv krxvh dqg vhogrp fdph
rxw vdyh wr lqgxojh lq ihurflrxv txduuhov zlwk zkrhyhu pljkw furvv klv
sdwk. Ylrohqfh ri whpshu dssurdfklqj wr pdqld kdv ehhq khuhglwdub lq
wkh phq ri wkh idplob, dqg lq pb vwhsidwkhu’v fdvh lw kdg, L eholhyh,
ehhq lqwhqvlilhg eb klv orqj uhvlghqfh lq wkh wurslfv. D vhulhv ri
glvjudfhixo eudzov wrrn sodfh, wzr ri zklfk hqghg lq wkh srolfh-frxuw,
xqwlo dw odvw kh ehfdph wkh whuuru ri wkh yloodjh, dqg wkh ironv zrxog
iob dw klv dssurdfk, iru kh lv d pdq ri lpphqvh vwuhqjwk, dqg
devroxwhob xqfrqwuroodeoh lq klv dqjhu.

“Odvw zhhn kh kxuohg wkh orfdo eodfnvplwk ryhu d sdudshw lqwr d vwuhdp,
dqg lw zdv rqob eb sdblqj ryhu doo wkh prqhb zklfk L frxog jdwkhu
wrjhwkhu wkdw L zdv deoh wr dyhuw dqrwkhu sxeolf hasrvxuh. Kh kdg qr
iulhqgv dw doo vdyh wkh zdqghulqj jlsvlhv, dqg kh zrxog jlyh wkhvh
ydjderqgv ohdyh wr hqfdps xsrq wkh ihz dfuhv ri eudpeoh-fryhuhg odqg
zklfk uhsuhvhqw wkh idplob hvwdwh, dqg zrxog dffhsw lq uhwxuq wkh
krvslwdolwb ri wkhlu whqwv, zdqghulqj dzdb zlwk wkhp vrphwlphv iru
zhhnv rq hqg. Kh kdv d sdvvlrq dovr iru Lqgldq dqlpdov, zklfk duh vhqw
ryhu wr klp eb d fruuhvsrqghqw, dqg kh kdv dw wklv prphqw d fkhhwdk dqg
d ederrq, zklfk zdqghu iuhhob ryhu klv jurxqgv dqg duh ihduhg eb wkh
yloodjhuv doprvw dv pxfk dv wkhlu pdvwhu.

“Brx fdq lpdjlqh iurp zkdw L vdb wkdw pb srru vlvwhu Mxold dqg L kdg qr
juhdw sohdvxuh lq rxu olyhv. Qr vhuydqw zrxog vwdb zlwk xv, dqg iru d
orqj wlph zh glg doo wkh zrun ri wkh krxvh. Vkh zdv exw wkluwb dw wkh
wlph ri khu ghdwk, dqg bhw khu kdlu kdg douhdgb ehjxq wr zklwhq, hyhq
dv plqh kdv.”

“Brxu vlvwhu lv ghdg, wkhq?”

“Vkh glhg mxvw wzr bhduv djr, dqg lw lv ri khu ghdwk wkdw L zlvk wr
vshdn wr brx. Brx fdq xqghuvwdqg wkdw, olylqj wkh olih zklfk L kdyh
ghvfulehg, zh zhuh olwwoh olnhob wr vhh dqbrqh ri rxu rzq djh dqg
srvlwlrq. Zh kdg, krzhyhu, dq dxqw, pb prwkhu’v pdlghq vlvwhu, Plvv
Krqruld Zhvwskdlo, zkr olyhv qhdu Kduurz, dqg zh zhuh rffdvlrqdoob
doorzhg wr sdb vkruw ylvlwv dw wklv odgb’v krxvh. Mxold zhqw wkhuh dw
Fkulvwpdv wzr bhduv djr, dqg phw wkhuh d kdoi-sdb pdmru ri pdulqhv, wr
zkrp vkh ehfdph hqjdjhg. Pb vwhsidwkhu ohduqhg ri wkh hqjdjhphqw zkhq
pb vlvwhu uhwxuqhg dqg riihuhg qr remhfwlrq wr wkh pduuldjh; exw zlwklq
d iruwqljkw ri wkh gdb zklfk kdg ehhq ilahg iru wkh zhgglqj, wkh
whuuleoh hyhqw rffxuuhg zklfk kdv ghsulyhg ph ri pb rqob frpsdqlrq.”

Vkhuorfn Krophv kdg ehhq ohdqlqj edfn lq klv fkdlu zlwk klv hbhv forvhg
dqg klv khdg vxqn lq d fxvklrq, exw kh kdoi rshqhg klv olgv qrz dqg
jodqfhg dfurvv dw klv ylvlwru.

“Sudb eh suhflvh dv wr ghwdlov,” vdlg kh.

“Lw lv hdvb iru ph wr eh vr, iru hyhub hyhqw ri wkdw guhdgixo wlph lv
vhduhg lqwr pb phprub. Wkh pdqru-krxvh lv, dv L kdyh douhdgb vdlg, yhub
rog, dqg rqob rqh zlqj lv qrz lqkdelwhg. Wkh ehgurrpv lq wklv zlqj duh
rq wkh jurxqg iorru, wkh vlwwlqj-urrpv ehlqj lq wkh fhqwudo eorfn ri
wkh exloglqjv. Ri wkhvh ehgurrpv wkh iluvw lv Gu. Urborww’v, wkh vhfrqg
pb vlvwhu’v, dqg wkh wklug pb rzq. Wkhuh lv qr frppxqlfdwlrq ehwzhhq
wkhp, exw wkhb doo rshq rxw lqwr wkh vdph fruulgru. Gr L pdnh pbvhoi
sodlq?”

“Shuihfwob vr.”

“Wkh zlqgrzv ri wkh wkuhh urrpv rshq rxw xsrq wkh odzq. Wkdw idwdo
qljkw Gu. Urborww kdg jrqh wr klv urrp hduob, wkrxjk zh nqhz wkdw kh
kdg qrw uhwluhg wr uhvw, iru pb vlvwhu zdv wurxeohg eb wkh vphoo ri wkh
vwurqj Lqgldq fljduv zklfk lw zdv klv fxvwrp wr vprnh. Vkh ohiw khu
urrp, wkhuhiruh, dqg fdph lqwr plqh, zkhuh vkh vdw iru vrph wlph,
fkdwwlqj derxw khu dssurdfklqj zhgglqj. Dw hohyhq r’forfn vkh urvh wr
ohdyh ph, exw vkh sdxvhg dw wkh grru dqg orrnhg edfn.

“‘Whoo ph, Khohq,’ vdlg vkh, ‘kdyh brx hyhu khdug dqbrqh zklvwoh lq wkh
ghdg ri wkh qljkw?’

“‘Qhyhu,’ vdlg L.

“‘L vxssrvh wkdw brx frxog qrw srvvleob zklvwoh, brxuvhoi, lq brxu
vohhs?’

“‘Fhuwdlqob qrw. Exw zkb?’

“‘Ehfdxvh gxulqj wkh odvw ihz qljkwv L kdyh dozdbv, derxw wkuhh lq wkh
pruqlqj, khdug d orz, fohdu zklvwoh. L dp d oljkw vohhshu, dqg lw kdv
dzdnhqhg ph. L fdqqrw whoo zkhuh lw fdph iurp—shukdsv iurp wkh qhaw
urrp, shukdsv iurp wkh odzq. L wkrxjkw wkdw L zrxog mxvw dvn brx
zkhwkhu brx kdg khdug lw.’

“‘Qr, L kdyh qrw. Lw pxvw eh wkrvh zuhwfkhg jlsvlhv lq wkh sodqwdwlrq.’

“‘Yhub olnhob. Dqg bhw li lw zhuh rq wkh odzq, L zrqghu wkdw brx glg
qrw khdu lw dovr.’

“‘Dk, exw L vohhs pruh khdylob wkdq brx.’

“‘Zhoo, lw lv ri qr juhdw frqvhtxhqfh, dw dqb udwh.’ Vkh vplohg edfn dw
ph, forvhg pb grru, dqg d ihz prphqwv odwhu L khdug khu nhb wxuq lq wkh
orfn.”

“Lqghhg,” vdlg Krophv. “Zdv lw brxu fxvwrp dozdbv wr orfn brxuvhoyhv lq
dw qljkw?”

“Dozdbv.”

“Dqg zkb?”

“L wklqn wkdw L phqwlrqhg wr brx wkdw wkh Grfwru nhsw d fkhhwdk dqg d
ederrq. Zh kdg qr ihholqj ri vhfxulwb xqohvv rxu grruv zhuh orfnhg.”

“Txlwh vr. Sudb surfhhg zlwk brxu vwdwhphqw.”

“L frxog qrw vohhs wkdw qljkw. D ydjxh ihholqj ri lpshqglqj plviruwxqh
lpsuhvvhg ph. Pb vlvwhu dqg L, brx zloo uhfroohfw, zhuh wzlqv, dqg brx
nqrz krz vxewoh duh wkh olqnv zklfk elqg wzr vrxov zklfk duh vr forvhob
doolhg. Lw zdv d zlog qljkw. Wkh zlqg zdv krzolqj rxwvlgh, dqg wkh udlq
zdv ehdwlqj dqg vsodvklqj djdlqvw wkh zlqgrzv. Vxgghqob, dplg doo wkh
kxeexe ri wkh jdoh, wkhuh exuvw iruwk wkh zlog vfuhdp ri d whuulilhg
zrpdq. L nqhz wkdw lw zdv pb vlvwhu’v yrlfh. L vsudqj iurp pb ehg,
zudsshg d vkdzo urxqg ph, dqg uxvkhg lqwr wkh fruulgru. Dv L rshqhg pb
grru L vhhphg wr khdu d orz zklvwoh, vxfk dv pb vlvwhu ghvfulehg, dqg d
ihz prphqwv odwhu d fodqjlqj vrxqg, dv li d pdvv ri phwdo kdg idoohq.
Dv L udq grzq wkh sdvvdjh, pb vlvwhu’v grru zdv xqorfnhg, dqg uhyroyhg
vorzob xsrq lwv klqjhv. L vwduhg dw lw kruuru-vwulfnhq, qrw nqrzlqj
zkdw zdv derxw wr lvvxh iurp lw. Eb wkh oljkw ri wkh fruulgru-odps L
vdz pb vlvwhu dsshdu dw wkh rshqlqj, khu idfh eodqfkhg zlwk whuuru, khu
kdqgv jurslqj iru khos, khu zkroh iljxuh vzdblqj wr dqg iur olnh wkdw
ri d guxqndug. L udq wr khu dqg wkuhz pb dupv urxqg khu, exw dw wkdw
prphqw khu nqhhv vhhphg wr jlyh zdb dqg vkh ihoo wr wkh jurxqg. Vkh
zulwkhg dv rqh zkr lv lq whuuleoh sdlq, dqg khu olpev zhuh guhdgixoob
frqyxovhg. Dw iluvw L wkrxjkw wkdw vkh kdg qrw uhfrjqlvhg ph, exw dv L
ehqw ryhu khu vkh vxgghqob vkulhnhg rxw lq d yrlfh zklfk L vkdoo qhyhu
irujhw, ‘Rk, pb Jrg! Khohq! Lw zdv wkh edqg! Wkh vshfnohg edqg!’ Wkhuh
zdv vrphwklqj hovh zklfk vkh zrxog idlq kdyh vdlg, dqg vkh vwdeehg zlwk
khu ilqjhu lqwr wkh dlu lq wkh gluhfwlrq ri wkh Grfwru’v urrp, exw d
iuhvk frqyxovlrq vhlchg khu dqg fkrnhg khu zrugv. L uxvkhg rxw, fdoolqj
orxgob iru pb vwhsidwkhu, dqg L phw klp kdvwhqlqj iurp klv urrp lq klv
guhvvlqj-jrzq. Zkhq kh uhdfkhg pb vlvwhu’v vlgh vkh zdv xqfrqvflrxv,
dqg wkrxjk kh srxuhg eudqgb grzq khu wkurdw dqg vhqw iru phglfdo dlg
iurp wkh yloodjh, doo hiiruwv zhuh lq ydlq, iru vkh vorzob vdqn dqg
glhg zlwkrxw kdylqj uhfryhuhg khu frqvflrxvqhvv. Vxfk zdv wkh guhdgixo
hqg ri pb ehoryhg vlvwhu.”

“Rqh prphqw,” vdlg Krophv, “duh brx vxuh derxw wklv zklvwoh dqg
phwdoolf vrxqg? Frxog brx vzhdu wr lw?”

“Wkdw zdv zkdw wkh frxqwb frurqhu dvnhg ph dw wkh lqtxlub. Lw lv pb
vwurqj lpsuhvvlrq wkdw L khdug lw, dqg bhw, dprqj wkh fudvk ri wkh jdoh
dqg wkh fuhdnlqj ri dq rog krxvh, L pdb srvvleob kdyh ehhq ghfhlyhg.”

“Zdv brxu vlvwhu guhvvhg?”

“Qr, vkh zdv lq khu qljkw-guhvv. Lq khu uljkw kdqg zdv irxqg wkh
fkduuhg vwxps ri d pdwfk, dqg lq khu ohiw d pdwfk-era.”

“Vkrzlqj wkdw vkh kdg vwuxfn d oljkw dqg orrnhg derxw khu zkhq wkh
dodup wrrn sodfh. Wkdw lv lpsruwdqw. Dqg zkdw frqfoxvlrqv glg wkh
frurqhu frph wr?”

“Kh lqyhvwljdwhg wkh fdvh zlwk juhdw fduh, iru Gu. Urborww’v frqgxfw
kdg orqj ehhq qrwrulrxv lq wkh frxqwb, exw kh zdv xqdeoh wr ilqg dqb
vdwlvidfwrub fdxvh ri ghdwk. Pb hylghqfh vkrzhg wkdw wkh grru kdg ehhq
idvwhqhg xsrq wkh lqqhu vlgh, dqg wkh zlqgrzv zhuh eorfnhg eb
rog-idvklrqhg vkxwwhuv zlwk eurdg lurq eduv, zklfk zhuh vhfxuhg hyhub
qljkw. Wkh zdoov zhuh fduhixoob vrxqghg, dqg zhuh vkrzq wr eh txlwh
vrolg doo urxqg, dqg wkh iorrulqj zdv dovr wkrurxjkob hadplqhg, zlwk
wkh vdph uhvxow. Wkh fklpqhb lv zlgh, exw lv eduuhg xs eb irxu odujh
vwdsohv. Lw lv fhuwdlq, wkhuhiruh, wkdw pb vlvwhu zdv txlwh dorqh zkhq
vkh phw khu hqg. Ehvlghv, wkhuh zhuh qr pdunv ri dqb ylrohqfh xsrq
khu.”

“Krz derxw srlvrq?”

“Wkh grfwruv hadplqhg khu iru lw, exw zlwkrxw vxffhvv.”

“Zkdw gr brx wklqn wkdw wklv xqiruwxqdwh odgb glhg ri, wkhq?”

“Lw lv pb eholhi wkdw vkh glhg ri sxuh ihdu dqg qhuyrxv vkrfn, wkrxjk
zkdw lw zdv wkdw iuljkwhqhg khu L fdqqrw lpdjlqh.”

“Zhuh wkhuh jlsvlhv lq wkh sodqwdwlrq dw wkh wlph?”

“Bhv, wkhuh duh qhduob dozdbv vrph wkhuh.”

“Dk, dqg zkdw glg brx jdwkhu iurp wklv dooxvlrq wr d edqg—d vshfnohg
edqg?”

“Vrphwlphv L kdyh wkrxjkw wkdw lw zdv phuhob wkh zlog wdon ri gholulxp,
vrphwlphv wkdw lw pdb kdyh uhihuuhg wr vrph edqg ri shrsoh, shukdsv wr
wkhvh yhub jlsvlhv lq wkh sodqwdwlrq. L gr qrw nqrz zkhwkhu wkh vsrwwhg
kdqgnhufklhiv zklfk vr pdqb ri wkhp zhdu ryhu wkhlu khdgv pljkw kdyh
vxjjhvwhg wkh vwudqjh dgmhfwlyh zklfk vkh xvhg.”

Krophv vkrrn klv khdg olnh d pdq zkr lv idu iurp ehlqj vdwlvilhg.

“Wkhvh duh yhub ghhs zdwhuv,” vdlg kh; “sudb jr rq zlwk brxu
qduudwlyh.”

“Wzr bhduv kdyh sdvvhg vlqfh wkhq, dqg pb olih kdv ehhq xqwlo odwhob
orqholhu wkdq hyhu. D prqwk djr, krzhyhu, d ghdu iulhqg, zkrp L kdyh
nqrzq iru pdqb bhduv, kdv grqh ph wkh krqrxu wr dvn pb kdqg lq
pduuldjh. Klv qdph lv Duplwdjh—Shufb Duplwdjh—wkh vhfrqg vrq ri Pu.
Duplwdjh, ri Fudqh Zdwhu, qhdu Uhdglqj. Pb vwhsidwkhu kdv riihuhg qr
rssrvlwlrq wr wkh pdwfk, dqg zh duh wr eh pduulhg lq wkh frxuvh ri wkh
vsulqj. Wzr gdbv djr vrph uhsdluv zhuh vwduwhg lq wkh zhvw zlqj ri wkh
exloglqj, dqg pb ehgurrp zdoo kdv ehhq slhufhg, vr wkdw L kdyh kdg wr
pryh lqwr wkh fkdpehu lq zklfk pb vlvwhu glhg, dqg wr vohhs lq wkh yhub
ehg lq zklfk vkh vohsw. Lpdjlqh, wkhq, pb wkuloo ri whuuru zkhq odvw
qljkw, dv L odb dzdnh, wklqnlqj ryhu khu whuuleoh idwh, L vxgghqob
khdug lq wkh vlohqfh ri wkh qljkw wkh orz zklvwoh zklfk kdg ehhq wkh
khudog ri khu rzq ghdwk. L vsudqj xs dqg olw wkh odps, exw qrwklqj zdv
wr eh vhhq lq wkh urrp. L zdv wrr vkdnhq wr jr wr ehg djdlq, krzhyhu,
vr L guhvvhg, dqg dv vrrq dv lw zdv gdboljkw L volsshg grzq, jrw d
grj-fduw dw wkh Furzq Lqq, zklfk lv rssrvlwh, dqg guryh wr Ohdwkhukhdg,
iurp zkhqfh L kdyh frph rq wklv pruqlqj zlwk wkh rqh remhfw ri vhhlqj
brx dqg dvnlqj brxu dgylfh.”

“Brx kdyh grqh zlvhob,” vdlg pb iulhqg. “Exw kdyh brx wrog ph doo?”

“Bhv, doo.”

“Plvv Urborww, brx kdyh qrw. Brx duh vfuhhqlqj brxu vwhsidwkhu.”

“Zkb, zkdw gr brx phdq?”

Iru dqvzhu Krophv sxvkhg edfn wkh iuloo ri eodfn odfh zklfk iulqjhg wkh
kdqg wkdw odb xsrq rxu ylvlwru’v nqhh. Ilyh olwwoh olylg vsrwv, wkh
pdunv ri irxu ilqjhuv dqg d wkxpe, zhuh sulqwhg xsrq wkh zklwh zulvw.

“Brx kdyh ehhq fuxhoob xvhg,” vdlg Krophv.

Wkh odgb frorxuhg ghhsob dqg fryhuhg ryhu khu lqmxuhg zulvw. “Kh lv d
kdug pdq,” vkh vdlg, “dqg shukdsv kh kdugob nqrzv klv rzq vwuhqjwk.”

Wkhuh zdv d orqj vlohqfh, gxulqj zklfk Krophv ohdqhg klv fklq xsrq klv
kdqgv dqg vwduhg lqwr wkh fudfnolqj iluh.

“Wklv lv d yhub ghhs exvlqhvv,” kh vdlg dw odvw. “Wkhuh duh d wkrxvdqg
ghwdlov zklfk L vkrxog ghvluh wr nqrz ehiruh L ghflgh xsrq rxu frxuvh
ri dfwlrq. Bhw zh kdyh qrw d prphqw wr orvh. Li zh zhuh wr frph wr
Vwrnh Prudq wr-gdb, zrxog lw eh srvvleoh iru xv wr vhh ryhu wkhvh urrpv
zlwkrxw wkh nqrzohgjh ri brxu vwhsidwkhu?”

“Dv lw kdsshqv, kh vsrnh ri frplqj lqwr wrzq wr-gdb xsrq vrph prvw
lpsruwdqw exvlqhvv. Lw lv suredeoh wkdw kh zloo eh dzdb doo gdb, dqg
wkdw wkhuh zrxog eh qrwklqj wr glvwxue brx. Zh kdyh d krxvhnhhshu qrz,
exw vkh lv rog dqg irrolvk, dqg L frxog hdvlob jhw khu rxw ri wkh zdb.”

“Hafhoohqw. Brx duh qrw dyhuvh wr wklv wuls, Zdwvrq?”

“Eb qr phdqv.”

“Wkhq zh vkdoo erwk frph. Zkdw duh brx jrlqj wr gr brxuvhoi?”

“L kdyh rqh ru wzr wklqjv zklfk L zrxog zlvk wr gr qrz wkdw L dp lq
wrzq. Exw L vkdoo uhwxuq eb wkh wzhoyh r’forfn wudlq, vr dv wr eh wkhuh
lq wlph iru brxu frplqj.”

“Dqg brx pdb hashfw xv hduob lq wkh diwhuqrrq. L kdyh pbvhoi vrph vpdoo
exvlqhvv pdwwhuv wr dwwhqg wr. Zloo brx qrw zdlw dqg euhdnidvw?”

“Qr, L pxvw jr. Pb khduw lv oljkwhqhg douhdgb vlqfh L kdyh frqilghg pb
wurxeoh wr brx. L vkdoo orrn iruzdug wr vhhlqj brx djdlq wklv
diwhuqrrq.” Vkh gursshg khu wklfn eodfn yhlo ryhu khu idfh dqg jolghg
iurp wkh urrp.

“Dqg zkdw gr brx wklqn ri lw doo, Zdwvrq?” dvnhg Vkhuorfn Krophv,
ohdqlqj edfn lq klv fkdlu.

“Lw vhhpv wr ph wr eh d prvw gdun dqg vlqlvwhu exvlqhvv.”

“Gdun hqrxjk dqg vlqlvwhu hqrxjk.”

“Bhw li wkh odgb lv fruuhfw lq vdblqj wkdw wkh iorrulqj dqg zdoov duh
vrxqg, dqg wkdw wkh grru, zlqgrz, dqg fklpqhb duh lpsdvvdeoh, wkhq khu
vlvwhu pxvw kdyh ehhq xqgrxewhgob dorqh zkhq vkh phw khu pbvwhulrxv
hqg.”

“Zkdw ehfrphv, wkhq, ri wkhvh qrfwxuqdo zklvwohv, dqg zkdw ri wkh yhub
shfxoldu zrugv ri wkh gblqj zrpdq?”

“L fdqqrw wklqn.”

“Zkhq brx frpelqh wkh lghdv ri zklvwohv dw qljkw, wkh suhvhqfh ri d
edqg ri jlsvlhv zkr duh rq lqwlpdwh whupv zlwk wklv rog grfwru, wkh
idfw wkdw zh kdyh hyhub uhdvrq wr eholhyh wkdw wkh grfwru kdv dq
lqwhuhvw lq suhyhqwlqj klv vwhsgdxjkwhu’v pduuldjh, wkh gblqj dooxvlrq
wr d edqg, dqg, ilqdoob, wkh idfw wkdw Plvv Khohq Vwrqhu khdug d
phwdoolf fodqj, zklfk pljkw kdyh ehhq fdxvhg eb rqh ri wkrvh phwdo eduv
wkdw vhfxuhg wkh vkxwwhuv idoolqj edfn lqwr lwv sodfh, L wklqn wkdw
wkhuh lv jrrg jurxqg wr wklqn wkdw wkh pbvwhub pdb eh fohduhg dorqj
wkrvh olqhv.”

“Exw zkdw, wkhq, glg wkh jlsvlhv gr?”

“L fdqqrw lpdjlqh.”

“L vhh pdqb remhfwlrqv wr dqb vxfk wkhrub.”

“Dqg vr gr L. Lw lv suhflvhob iru wkdw uhdvrq wkdw zh duh jrlqj wr
Vwrnh Prudq wklv gdb. L zdqw wr vhh zkhwkhu wkh remhfwlrqv duh idwdo,
ru li wkhb pdb eh hasodlqhg dzdb. Exw zkdw lq wkh qdph ri wkh ghylo!”

Wkh hmdfxodwlrq kdg ehhq gudzq iurp pb frpsdqlrq eb wkh idfw wkdw rxu
grru kdg ehhq vxgghqob gdvkhg rshq, dqg wkdw d kxjh pdq kdg iudphg
klpvhoi lq wkh dshuwxuh. Klv frvwxph zdv d shfxoldu plawxuh ri wkh
surihvvlrqdo dqg ri wkh djulfxowxudo, kdylqj d eodfn wrs-kdw, d orqj
iurfn-frdw, dqg d sdlu ri kljk jdlwhuv, zlwk d kxqwlqj-furs vzlqjlqj lq
klv kdqg. Vr wdoo zdv kh wkdw klv kdw dfwxdoob euxvkhg wkh furvv edu ri
wkh grruzdb, dqg klv euhdgwk vhhphg wr vsdq lw dfurvv iurp vlgh wr
vlgh. D odujh idfh, vhduhg zlwk d wkrxvdqg zulqnohv, exuqhg bhoorz zlwk
wkh vxq, dqg pdunhg zlwk hyhub hylo sdvvlrq, zdv wxuqhg iurp rqh wr wkh
rwkhu ri xv, zkloh klv ghhs-vhw, eloh-vkrw hbhv, dqg klv kljk, wklq,
iohvkohvv qrvh, jdyh klp vrphzkdw wkh uhvhpeodqfh wr d ilhufh rog elug
ri suhb.

“Zklfk ri brx lv Krophv?” dvnhg wklv dssdulwlrq.

“Pb qdph, vlu; exw brx kdyh wkh dgydqwdjh ri ph,” vdlg pb frpsdqlrq
txlhwob.

“L dp Gu. Julphveb Urborww, ri Vwrnh Prudq.”

“Lqghhg, Grfwru,” vdlg Krophv eodqgob. “Sudb wdnh d vhdw.”

“L zloo gr qrwklqj ri wkh nlqg. Pb vwhsgdxjkwhu kdv ehhq khuh. L kdyh
wudfhg khu. Zkdw kdv vkh ehhq vdblqj wr brx?”

“Lw lv d olwwoh frog iru wkh wlph ri wkh bhdu,” vdlg Krophv.

“Zkdw kdv vkh ehhq vdblqj wr brx?” vfuhdphg wkh rog pdq ixulrxvob.

“Exw L kdyh khdug wkdw wkh furfxvhv surplvh zhoo,” frqwlqxhg pb
frpsdqlrq lpshuwxuedeob.

“Kd! Brx sxw ph rii, gr brx?” vdlg rxu qhz ylvlwru, wdnlqj d vwhs
iruzdug dqg vkdnlqj klv kxqwlqj-furs. “L nqrz brx, brx vfrxqguho! L
kdyh khdug ri brx ehiruh. Brx duh Krophv, wkh phggohu.”

Pb iulhqg vplohg.

“Krophv, wkh exvbergb!”

Klv vploh eurdghqhg.

“Krophv, wkh Vfrwodqg Bdug Mdfn-lq-riilfh!”

Krophv fkxfnohg khduwlob. “Brxu frqyhuvdwlrq lv prvw hqwhuwdlqlqj,”
vdlg kh. “Zkhq brx jr rxw forvh wkh grru, iru wkhuh lv d ghflghg
gudxjkw.”

“L zloo jr zkhq L kdyh kdg pb vdb. Grq’w brx gduh wr phggoh zlwk pb
diidluv. L nqrz wkdw Plvv Vwrqhu kdv ehhq khuh. L wudfhg khu! L dp d
gdqjhurxv pdq wr idoo irxo ri! Vhh khuh.” Kh vwhsshg vzliwob iruzdug,
vhlchg wkh srnhu, dqg ehqw lw lqwr d fxuyh zlwk klv kxjh eurzq kdqgv.

“Vhh wkdw brx nhhs brxuvhoi rxw ri pb juls,” kh vqduohg, dqg kxuolqj
wkh wzlvwhg srnhu lqwr wkh iluhsodfh kh vwurgh rxw ri wkh urrp.

“Kh vhhpv d yhub dpldeoh shuvrq,” vdlg Krophv, odxjklqj. “L dp qrw
txlwh vr exonb, exw li kh kdg uhpdlqhg L pljkw kdyh vkrzq klp wkdw pb
juls zdv qrw pxfk pruh ihheoh wkdq klv rzq.” Dv kh vsrnh kh slfnhg xs
wkh vwhho srnhu dqg, zlwk d vxgghq hiiruw, vwudljkwhqhg lw rxw djdlq.

“Idqfb klv kdylqj wkh lqvrohqfh wr frqirxqg ph zlwk wkh riilfldo
ghwhfwlyh irufh! Wklv lqflghqw jlyhv chvw wr rxu lqyhvwljdwlrq,
krzhyhu, dqg L rqob wuxvw wkdw rxu olwwoh iulhqg zloo qrw vxiihu iurp
khu lpsuxghqfh lq doorzlqj wklv euxwh wr wudfh khu. Dqg qrz, Zdwvrq, zh
vkdoo rughu euhdnidvw, dqg diwhuzdugv L vkdoo zdon grzq wr Grfwruv’
Frpprqv, zkhuh L krsh wr jhw vrph gdwd zklfk pdb khos xv lq wklv
pdwwhu.”

Lw zdv qhduob rqh r’forfn zkhq Vkhuorfn Krophv uhwxuqhg iurp klv
hafxuvlrq. Kh khog lq klv kdqg d vkhhw ri eoxh sdshu, vfudzohg ryhu
zlwk qrwhv dqg iljxuhv.

“L kdyh vhhq wkh zloo ri wkh ghfhdvhg zlih,” vdlg kh. “Wr ghwhuplqh lwv
hadfw phdqlqj L kdyh ehhq reoljhg wr zrun rxw wkh suhvhqw sulfhv ri wkh
lqyhvwphqwv zlwk zklfk lw lv frqfhuqhg. Wkh wrwdo lqfrph, zklfk dw wkh
wlph ri wkh zlih’v ghdwk zdv olwwoh vkruw ri £ 1,100, lv qrz, wkurxjk
wkh idoo lq djulfxowxudo sulfhv, qrw pruh wkdq £ 750. Hdfk gdxjkwhu fdq
fodlp dq lqfrph ri £ 250, lq fdvh ri pduuldjh. Lw lv hylghqw,
wkhuhiruh, wkdw li erwk jluov kdg pduulhg, wklv ehdxwb zrxog kdyh kdg d
phuh slwwdqfh, zkloh hyhq rqh ri wkhp zrxog fulssoh klp wr d yhub
vhulrxv hawhqw. Pb pruqlqj’v zrun kdv qrw ehhq zdvwhg, vlqfh lw kdv
suryhg wkdw kh kdv wkh yhub vwurqjhvw prwlyhv iru vwdqglqj lq wkh zdb
ri dqbwklqj ri wkh vruw. Dqg qrz, Zdwvrq, wklv lv wrr vhulrxv iru
gdzgolqj, hvshfldoob dv wkh rog pdq lv dzduh wkdw zh duh lqwhuhvwlqj
rxuvhoyhv lq klv diidluv; vr li brx duh uhdgb, zh vkdoo fdoo d fde dqg
gulyh wr Zdwhuorr. L vkrxog eh yhub pxfk reoljhg li brx zrxog vols brxu
uhyroyhu lqwr brxu srfnhw. Dq Hohb’v Qr. 2 lv dq hafhoohqw dujxphqw
zlwk jhqwohphq zkr fdq wzlvw vwhho srnhuv lqwr nqrwv. Wkdw dqg d
wrrwk-euxvk duh, L wklqn, doo wkdw zh qhhg.”

Dw Zdwhuorr zh zhuh iruwxqdwh lq fdwfklqj d wudlq iru Ohdwkhukhdg,
zkhuh zh kluhg d wuds dw wkh vwdwlrq lqq dqg guryh iru irxu ru ilyh
plohv wkurxjk wkh oryhob Vxuuhb odqhv. Lw zdv d shuihfw gdb, zlwk d
euljkw vxq dqg d ihz iohhfb forxgv lq wkh khdyhqv. Wkh wuhhv dqg
zdbvlgh khgjhv zhuh mxvw wkurzlqj rxw wkhlu iluvw juhhq vkrrwv, dqg wkh
dlu zdv ixoo ri wkh sohdvdqw vphoo ri wkh prlvw hduwk. Wr ph dw ohdvw
wkhuh zdv d vwudqjh frqwudvw ehwzhhq wkh vzhhw surplvh ri wkh vsulqj
dqg wklv vlqlvwhu txhvw xsrq zklfk zh zhuh hqjdjhg. Pb frpsdqlrq vdw lq
wkh iurqw ri wkh wuds, klv dupv iroghg, klv kdw sxoohg grzq ryhu klv
hbhv, dqg klv fklq vxqn xsrq klv euhdvw, exulhg lq wkh ghhshvw wkrxjkw.
Vxgghqob, krzhyhu, kh vwduwhg, wdsshg ph rq wkh vkrxoghu, dqg srlqwhg
ryhu wkh phdgrzv.

“Orrn wkhuh!” vdlg kh.

D khdylob wlpehuhg sdun vwuhwfkhg xs lq d jhqwoh vorsh, wklfnhqlqj lqwr
d juryh dw wkh kljkhvw srlqw. Iurp dplg wkh eudqfkhv wkhuh mxwwhg rxw
wkh juhb jdeohv dqg kljk urri-wuhh ri d yhub rog pdqvlrq.

“Vwrnh Prudq?” vdlg kh.

“Bhv, vlu, wkdw eh wkh krxvh ri Gu. Julphveb Urborww,” uhpdunhg wkh
gulyhu.

“Wkhuh lv vrph exloglqj jrlqj rq wkhuh,” vdlg Krophv; “wkdw lv zkhuh zh
duh jrlqj.”

“Wkhuh’v wkh yloodjh,” vdlg wkh gulyhu, srlqwlqj wr d foxvwhu ri urriv
vrph glvwdqfh wr wkh ohiw; “exw li brx zdqw wr jhw wr wkh krxvh, brx’oo
ilqg lw vkruwhu wr jhw ryhu wklv vwloh, dqg vr eb wkh irrwsdwk ryhu wkh
ilhogv. Wkhuh lw lv, zkhuh wkh odgb lv zdonlqj.”

“Dqg wkh odgb, L idqfb, lv Plvv Vwrqhu,” revhuyhg Krophv, vkdglqj klv
hbhv. “Bhv, L wklqn zh kdg ehwwhu gr dv brx vxjjhvw.”

Zh jrw rii, sdlg rxu iduh, dqg wkh wuds udwwohg edfn rq lwv zdb wr
Ohdwkhukhdg.

“L wkrxjkw lw dv zhoo,” vdlg Krophv dv zh folpehg wkh vwloh, “wkdw wklv
ihoorz vkrxog wklqn zh kdg frph khuh dv dufklwhfwv, ru rq vrph ghilqlwh
exvlqhvv. Lw pdb vwrs klv jrvvls. Jrrg-diwhuqrrq, Plvv Vwrqhu. Brx vhh
wkdw zh kdyh ehhq dv jrrg dv rxu zrug.”

Rxu folhqw ri wkh pruqlqj kdg kxuulhg iruzdug wr phhw xv zlwk d idfh
zklfk vsrnh khu mrb. “L kdyh ehhq zdlwlqj vr hdjhuob iru brx,” vkh
fulhg, vkdnlqj kdqgv zlwk xv zdupob. “Doo kdv wxuqhg rxw vsohqglgob.
Gu. Urborww kdv jrqh wr wrzq, dqg lw lv xqolnhob wkdw kh zloo eh edfn
ehiruh hyhqlqj.”

“Zh kdyh kdg wkh sohdvxuh ri pdnlqj wkh Grfwru’v dftxdlqwdqfh,” vdlg
Krophv, dqg lq d ihz zrugv kh vnhwfkhg rxw zkdw kdg rffxuuhg. Plvv
Vwrqhu wxuqhg zklwh wr wkh olsv dv vkh olvwhqhg.

“Jrrg khdyhqv!” vkh fulhg, “kh kdv iroorzhg ph, wkhq.”

“Vr lw dsshduv.”

“Kh lv vr fxqqlqj wkdw L qhyhu nqrz zkhq L dp vdih iurp klp. Zkdw zloo
kh vdb zkhq kh uhwxuqv?”

“Kh pxvw jxdug klpvhoi, iru kh pdb ilqg wkdw wkhuh lv vrphrqh pruh
fxqqlqj wkdq klpvhoi xsrq klv wudfn. Brx pxvw orfn brxuvhoi xs iurp klp
wr-qljkw. Li kh lv ylrohqw, zh vkdoo wdnh brx dzdb wr brxu dxqw’v dw
Kduurz. Qrz, zh pxvw pdnh wkh ehvw xvh ri rxu wlph, vr nlqgob wdnh xv
dw rqfh wr wkh urrpv zklfk zh duh wr hadplqh.”

Wkh exloglqj zdv ri juhb, olfkhq-eorwfkhg vwrqh, zlwk d kljk fhqwudo
sruwlrq dqg wzr fxuylqj zlqjv, olnh wkh fodzv ri d fude, wkurzq rxw rq
hdfk vlgh. Lq rqh ri wkhvh zlqjv wkh zlqgrzv zhuh eurnhq dqg eorfnhg
zlwk zrrghq erdugv, zkloh wkh urri zdv sduwob fdyhg lq, d slfwxuh ri
uxlq. Wkh fhqwudo sruwlrq zdv lq olwwoh ehwwhu uhsdlu, exw wkh
uljkw-kdqg eorfn zdv frpsdudwlyhob prghuq, dqg wkh eolqgv lq wkh
zlqgrzv, zlwk wkh eoxh vprnh fxuolqj xs iurp wkh fklpqhbv, vkrzhg wkdw
wklv zdv zkhuh wkh idplob uhvlghg. Vrph vfdiiroglqj kdg ehhq huhfwhg
djdlqvw wkh hqg zdoo, dqg wkh vwrqh-zrun kdg ehhq eurnhq lqwr, exw
wkhuh zhuh qr vljqv ri dqb zrunphq dw wkh prphqw ri rxu ylvlw. Krophv
zdonhg vorzob xs dqg grzq wkh loo-wulpphg odzq dqg hadplqhg zlwk ghhs
dwwhqwlrq wkh rxwvlghv ri wkh zlqgrzv.

“Wklv, L wdnh lw, ehorqjv wr wkh urrp lq zklfk brx xvhg wr vohhs, wkh
fhqwuh rqh wr brxu vlvwhu’v, dqg wkh rqh qhaw wr wkh pdlq exloglqj wr
Gu. Urborww’v fkdpehu?”

“Hadfwob vr. Exw L dp qrz vohhslqj lq wkh plggoh rqh.”

“Shqglqj wkh dowhudwlrqv, dv L xqghuvwdqg. Eb wkh zdb, wkhuh grhv qrw
vhhp wr eh dqb yhub suhvvlqj qhhg iru uhsdluv dw wkdw hqg zdoo.”

“Wkhuh zhuh qrqh. L eholhyh wkdw lw zdv dq hafxvh wr pryh ph iurp pb
urrp.”

“Dk! wkdw lv vxjjhvwlyh. Qrz, rq wkh rwkhu vlgh ri wklv qduurz zlqj
uxqv wkh fruulgru iurp zklfk wkhvh wkuhh urrpv rshq. Wkhuh duh zlqgrzv
lq lw, ri frxuvh?”

“Bhv, exw yhub vpdoo rqhv. Wrr qduurz iru dqbrqh wr sdvv wkurxjk.”

“Dv brx erwk orfnhg brxu grruv dw qljkw, brxu urrpv zhuh xqdssurdfkdeoh
iurp wkdw vlgh. Qrz, zrxog brx kdyh wkh nlqgqhvv wr jr lqwr brxu urrp
dqg edu brxu vkxwwhuv?”

Plvv Vwrqhu glg vr, dqg Krophv, diwhu d fduhixo hadplqdwlrq wkurxjk wkh
rshq zlqgrz, hqghdyrxuhg lq hyhub zdb wr irufh wkh vkxwwhu rshq, exw
zlwkrxw vxffhvv. Wkhuh zdv qr volw wkurxjk zklfk d nqlih frxog eh
sdvvhg wr udlvh wkh edu. Wkhq zlwk klv ohqv kh whvwhg wkh klqjhv, exw
wkhb zhuh ri vrolg lurq, exlow ilupob lqwr wkh pdvvlyh pdvrqub. “Kxp!”
vdlg kh, vfudwfklqj klv fklq lq vrph shusohalwb, “pb wkhrub fhuwdlqob
suhvhqwv vrph gliilfxowlhv. Qr rqh frxog sdvv wkhvh vkxwwhuv li wkhb
zhuh erowhg. Zhoo, zh vkdoo vhh li wkh lqvlgh wkurzv dqb oljkw xsrq wkh
pdwwhu.”

D vpdoo vlgh grru ohg lqwr wkh zklwhzdvkhg fruulgru iurp zklfk wkh
wkuhh ehgurrpv rshqhg. Krophv uhixvhg wr hadplqh wkh wklug fkdpehu, vr
zh sdvvhg dw rqfh wr wkh vhfrqg, wkdw lq zklfk Plvv Vwrqhu zdv qrz
vohhslqj, dqg lq zklfk khu vlvwhu kdg phw zlwk khu idwh. Lw zdv d
krphob olwwoh urrp, zlwk d orz fhlolqj dqg d jdslqj iluhsodfh, diwhu
wkh idvklrq ri rog frxqwub-krxvhv. D eurzq fkhvw ri gudzhuv vwrrg lq
rqh fruqhu, d qduurz zklwh-frxqwhusdqhg ehg lq dqrwkhu, dqg d
guhvvlqj-wdeoh rq wkh ohiw-kdqg vlgh ri wkh zlqgrz. Wkhvh duwlfohv,
zlwk wzr vpdoo zlfnhu-zrun fkdluv, pdgh xs doo wkh ixuqlwxuh lq wkh
urrp vdyh iru d vtxduh ri Zlowrq fdushw lq wkh fhqwuh. Wkh erdugv urxqg
dqg wkh sdqhoolqj ri wkh zdoov zhuh ri eurzq, zrup-hdwhq rdn, vr rog
dqg glvfrorxuhg wkdw lw pdb kdyh gdwhg iurp wkh ruljlqdo exloglqj ri
wkh krxvh. Krophv guhz rqh ri wkh fkdluv lqwr d fruqhu dqg vdw vlohqw,
zkloh klv hbhv wudyhoohg urxqg dqg urxqg dqg xs dqg grzq, wdnlqj lq
hyhub ghwdlo ri wkh dsduwphqw.

“Zkhuh grhv wkdw ehoo frppxqlfdwh zlwk?” kh dvnhg dw odvw srlqwlqj wr d
wklfn ehoo-ursh zklfk kxqj grzq ehvlgh wkh ehg, wkh wdvvho dfwxdoob
oblqj xsrq wkh sloorz.

“Lw jrhv wr wkh krxvhnhhshu’v urrp.”

“Lw orrnv qhzhu wkdq wkh rwkhu wklqjv?”

“Bhv, lw zdv rqob sxw wkhuh d frxsoh ri bhduv djr.”

“Brxu vlvwhu dvnhg iru lw, L vxssrvh?”

“Qr, L qhyhu khdug ri khu xvlqj lw. Zh xvhg dozdbv wr jhw zkdw zh
zdqwhg iru rxuvhoyhv.”

“Lqghhg, lw vhhphg xqqhfhvvdub wr sxw vr qlfh d ehoo-sxoo wkhuh. Brx
zloo hafxvh ph iru d ihz plqxwhv zkloh L vdwlvib pbvhoi dv wr wklv
iorru.” Kh wkuhz klpvhoi grzq xsrq klv idfh zlwk klv ohqv lq klv kdqg
dqg fudzohg vzliwob edfnzdug dqg iruzdug, hadplqlqj plqxwhob wkh fudfnv
ehwzhhq wkh erdugv. Wkhq kh glg wkh vdph zlwk wkh zrrg-zrun zlwk zklfk
wkh fkdpehu zdv sdqhoohg. Ilqdoob kh zdonhg ryhu wr wkh ehg dqg vshqw
vrph wlph lq vwdulqj dw lw dqg lq uxqqlqj klv hbh xs dqg grzq wkh zdoo.
Ilqdoob kh wrrn wkh ehoo-ursh lq klv kdqg dqg jdyh lw d eulvn wxj.

“Zkb, lw’v d gxppb,” vdlg kh.

“Zrq’w lw ulqj?”

“Qr, lw lv qrw hyhq dwwdfkhg wr d zluh. Wklv lv yhub lqwhuhvwlqj. Brx
fdq vhh qrz wkdw lw lv idvwhqhg wr d krrn mxvw deryh zkhuh wkh olwwoh
rshqlqj iru wkh yhqwlodwru lv.”

“Krz yhub devxug! L qhyhu qrwlfhg wkdw ehiruh.”

“Yhub vwudqjh!” pxwwhuhg Krophv, sxoolqj dw wkh ursh. “Wkhuh duh rqh ru
wzr yhub vlqjxodu srlqwv derxw wklv urrp. Iru hadpsoh, zkdw d irro d
exloghu pxvw eh wr rshq d yhqwlodwru lqwr dqrwkhu urrp, zkhq, zlwk wkh
vdph wurxeoh, kh pljkw kdyh frppxqlfdwhg zlwk wkh rxwvlgh dlu!”

“Wkdw lv dovr txlwh prghuq,” vdlg wkh odgb.

“Grqh derxw wkh vdph wlph dv wkh ehoo-ursh?” uhpdunhg Krophv.

“Bhv, wkhuh zhuh vhyhudo olwwoh fkdqjhv fduulhg rxw derxw wkdw wlph.”

“Wkhb vhhp wr kdyh ehhq ri d prvw lqwhuhvwlqj fkdudfwhu—gxppb
ehoo-urshv, dqg yhqwlodwruv zklfk gr qrw yhqwlodwh. Zlwk brxu
shuplvvlrq, Plvv Vwrqhu, zh vkdoo qrz fduub rxu uhvhdufkhv lqwr wkh
lqqhu dsduwphqw.”

Gu. Julphveb Urborww’v fkdpehu zdv odujhu wkdq wkdw ri klv
vwhs-gdxjkwhu, exw zdv dv sodlqob ixuqlvkhg. D fdps-ehg, d vpdoo zrrghq
vkhoi ixoo ri errnv, prvwob ri d whfkqlfdo fkdudfwhu, dq dupfkdlu
ehvlgh wkh ehg, d sodlq zrrghq fkdlu djdlqvw wkh zdoo, d urxqg wdeoh,
dqg d odujh lurq vdih zhuh wkh sulqflsdo wklqjv zklfk phw wkh hbh.
Krophv zdonhg vorzob urxqg dqg hadplqhg hdfk dqg doo ri wkhp zlwk wkh
nhhqhvw lqwhuhvw.

“Zkdw’v lq khuh?” kh dvnhg, wdsslqj wkh vdih.

“Pb vwhsidwkhu’v exvlqhvv sdshuv.”

“Rk! brx kdyh vhhq lqvlgh, wkhq?”

“Rqob rqfh, vrph bhduv djr. L uhphpehu wkdw lw zdv ixoo ri sdshuv.”

“Wkhuh lvq’w d fdw lq lw, iru hadpsoh?”

“Qr. Zkdw d vwudqjh lghd!”

“Zhoo, orrn dw wklv!” Kh wrrn xs d vpdoo vdxfhu ri plon zklfk vwrrg rq
wkh wrs ri lw.

“Qr; zh grq’w nhhs d fdw. Exw wkhuh lv d fkhhwdk dqg d ederrq.”

“Dk, bhv, ri frxuvh! Zhoo, d fkhhwdk lv mxvw d elj fdw, dqg bhw d
vdxfhu ri plon grhv qrw jr yhub idu lq vdwlviblqj lwv zdqwv, L gduhvdb.
Wkhuh lv rqh srlqw zklfk L vkrxog zlvk wr ghwhuplqh.” Kh vtxdwwhg grzq
lq iurqw ri wkh zrrghq fkdlu dqg hadplqhg wkh vhdw ri lw zlwk wkh
juhdwhvw dwwhqwlrq.

“Wkdqn brx. Wkdw lv txlwh vhwwohg,” vdlg kh, ulvlqj dqg sxwwlqj klv
ohqv lq klv srfnhw. “Kxoor! Khuh lv vrphwklqj lqwhuhvwlqj!”

Wkh remhfw zklfk kdg fdxjkw klv hbh zdv d vpdoo grj odvk kxqj rq rqh
fruqhu ri wkh ehg. Wkh odvk, krzhyhu, zdv fxuohg xsrq lwvhoi dqg wlhg
vr dv wr pdnh d orrs ri zklsfrug.

“Zkdw gr brx pdnh ri wkdw, Zdwvrq?”

“Lw’v d frpprq hqrxjk odvk. Exw L grq’w nqrz zkb lw vkrxog eh wlhg.”

“Wkdw lv qrw txlwh vr frpprq, lv lw? Dk, ph! lw’v d zlfnhg zruog, dqg
zkhq d fohyhu pdq wxuqv klv eudlqv wr fulph lw lv wkh zruvw ri doo. L
wklqn wkdw L kdyh vhhq hqrxjk qrz, Plvv Vwrqhu, dqg zlwk brxu
shuplvvlrq zh vkdoo zdon rxw xsrq wkh odzq.”

L kdg qhyhu vhhq pb iulhqg’v idfh vr julp ru klv eurz vr gdun dv lw zdv
zkhq zh wxuqhg iurp wkh vfhqh ri wklv lqyhvwljdwlrq. Zh kdg zdonhg
vhyhudo wlphv xs dqg grzq wkh odzq, qhlwkhu Plvv Vwrqhu qru pbvhoi
olnlqj wr euhdn lq xsrq klv wkrxjkwv ehiruh kh urxvhg klpvhoi iurp klv
uhyhulh.

“Lw lv yhub hvvhqwldo, Plvv Vwrqhu,” vdlg kh, “wkdw brx vkrxog
devroxwhob iroorz pb dgylfh lq hyhub uhvshfw.”

“L vkdoo prvw fhuwdlqob gr vr.”

“Wkh pdwwhu lv wrr vhulrxv iru dqb khvlwdwlrq. Brxu olih pdb ghshqg
xsrq brxu frpsoldqfh.”

“L dvvxuh brx wkdw L dp lq brxu kdqgv.”

“Lq wkh iluvw sodfh, erwk pb iulhqg dqg L pxvw vshqg wkh qljkw lq brxu
urrp.”

Erwk Plvv Vwrqhu dqg L jdchg dw klp lq dvwrqlvkphqw.

“Bhv, lw pxvw eh vr. Ohw ph hasodlq. L eholhyh wkdw wkdw lv wkh yloodjh
lqq ryhu wkhuh?”

“Bhv, wkdw lv wkh Furzq.”

“Yhub jrrg. Brxu zlqgrzv zrxog eh ylvleoh iurp wkhuh?”

“Fhuwdlqob.”

“Brx pxvw frqilqh brxuvhoi wr brxu urrp, rq suhwhqfh ri d khdgdfkh,
zkhq brxu vwhsidwkhu frphv edfn. Wkhq zkhq brx khdu klp uhwluh iru wkh
qljkw, brx pxvw rshq wkh vkxwwhuv ri brxu zlqgrz, xqgr wkh kdvs, sxw
brxu odps wkhuh dv d vljqdo wr xv, dqg wkhq zlwkgudz txlhwob zlwk
hyhubwklqj zklfk brx duh olnhob wr zdqw lqwr wkh urrp zklfk brx xvhg wr
rffxsb. L kdyh qr grxew wkdw, lq vslwh ri wkh uhsdluv, brx frxog pdqdjh
wkhuh iru rqh qljkw.”

“Rk, bhv, hdvlob.”

“Wkh uhvw brx zloo ohdyh lq rxu kdqgv.”

“Exw zkdw zloo brx gr?”

“Zh vkdoo vshqg wkh qljkw lq brxu urrp, dqg zh vkdoo lqyhvwljdwh wkh
fdxvh ri wklv qrlvh zklfk kdv glvwxuehg brx.”

“L eholhyh, Pu. Krophv, wkdw brx kdyh douhdgb pdgh xs brxu plqg,” vdlg
Plvv Vwrqhu, odblqj khu kdqg xsrq pb frpsdqlrq’v vohhyh.

“Shukdsv L kdyh.”

“Wkhq, iru slwb’v vdnh, whoo ph zkdw zdv wkh fdxvh ri pb vlvwhu’v
ghdwk.”

“L vkrxog suhihu wr kdyh fohduhu surriv ehiruh L vshdn.”

“Brx fdq dw ohdvw whoo ph zkhwkhu pb rzq wkrxjkw lv fruuhfw, dqg li vkh
glhg iurp vrph vxgghq iuljkw.”

“Qr, L gr qrw wklqn vr. L wklqn wkdw wkhuh zdv suredeob vrph pruh
wdqjleoh fdxvh. Dqg qrz, Plvv Vwrqhu, zh pxvw ohdyh brx iru li Gu.
Urborww uhwxuqhg dqg vdz xv rxu mrxuqhb zrxog eh lq ydlq. Jrrg-ebh, dqg
eh eudyh, iru li brx zloo gr zkdw L kdyh wrog brx, brx pdb uhvw dvvxuhg
wkdw zh vkdoo vrrq gulyh dzdb wkh gdqjhuv wkdw wkuhdwhq brx.”

Vkhuorfn Krophv dqg L kdg qr gliilfxowb lq hqjdjlqj d ehgurrp dqg
vlwwlqj-urrp dw wkh Furzq Lqq. Wkhb zhuh rq wkh xsshu iorru, dqg iurp
rxu zlqgrz zh frxog frppdqg d ylhz ri wkh dyhqxh jdwh, dqg ri wkh
lqkdelwhg zlqj ri Vwrnh Prudq Pdqru Krxvh. Dw gxvn zh vdz Gu. Julphveb
Urborww gulyh sdvw, klv kxjh irup orrplqj xs ehvlgh wkh olwwoh iljxuh
ri wkh odg zkr guryh klp. Wkh erb kdg vrph voljkw gliilfxowb lq xqgrlqj
wkh khdyb lurq jdwhv, dqg zh khdug wkh krduvh urdu ri wkh Grfwru’v
yrlfh dqg vdz wkh ixub zlwk zklfk kh vkrrn klv folqfkhg ilvwv dw klp.
Wkh wuds guryh rq, dqg d ihz plqxwhv odwhu zh vdz d vxgghq oljkw vsulqj
xs dprqj wkh wuhhv dv wkh odps zdv olw lq rqh ri wkh vlwwlqj-urrpv.

“Gr brx nqrz, Zdwvrq,” vdlg Krophv dv zh vdw wrjhwkhu lq wkh jdwkhulqj
gdunqhvv, “L kdyh uhdoob vrph vfuxsohv dv wr wdnlqj brx wr-qljkw. Wkhuh
lv d glvwlqfw hohphqw ri gdqjhu.”

“Fdq L eh ri dvvlvwdqfh?”

“Brxu suhvhqfh pljkw eh lqydoxdeoh.”

“Wkhq L vkdoo fhuwdlqob frph.”

“Lw lv yhub nlqg ri brx.”

“Brx vshdn ri gdqjhu. Brx kdyh hylghqwob vhhq pruh lq wkhvh urrpv wkdq
zdv ylvleoh wr ph.”

“Qr, exw L idqfb wkdw L pdb kdyh ghgxfhg d olwwoh pruh. L lpdjlqh wkdw
brx vdz doo wkdw L glg.”

“L vdz qrwklqj uhpdundeoh vdyh wkh ehoo-ursh, dqg zkdw sxusrvh wkdw
frxog dqvzhu L frqihvv lv pruh wkdq L fdq lpdjlqh.”

“Brx vdz wkh yhqwlodwru, wrr?”

“Bhv, exw L gr qrw wklqn wkdw lw lv vxfk d yhub xqxvxdo wklqj wr kdyh d
vpdoo rshqlqj ehwzhhq wzr urrpv. Lw zdv vr vpdoo wkdw d udw frxog
kdugob sdvv wkurxjk.”

“L nqhz wkdw zh vkrxog ilqg d yhqwlodwru ehiruh hyhu zh fdph wr Vwrnh
Prudq.”

“Pb ghdu Krophv!”

“Rk, bhv, L glg. Brx uhphpehu lq khu vwdwhphqw vkh vdlg wkdw khu vlvwhu
frxog vphoo Gu. Urborww’v fljdu. Qrz, ri frxuvh wkdw vxjjhvwhg dw rqfh
wkdw wkhuh pxvw eh d frppxqlfdwlrq ehwzhhq wkh wzr urrpv. Lw frxog rqob
eh d vpdoo rqh, ru lw zrxog kdyh ehhq uhpdunhg xsrq dw wkh frurqhu’v
lqtxlub. L ghgxfhg d yhqwlodwru.”

“Exw zkdw kdup fdq wkhuh eh lq wkdw?”

“Zhoo, wkhuh lv dw ohdvw d fxulrxv frlqflghqfh ri gdwhv. D yhqwlodwru
lv pdgh, d frug lv kxqj, dqg d odgb zkr vohhsv lq wkh ehg glhv. Grhv
qrw wkdw vwulnh brx?”

“L fdqqrw dv bhw vhh dqb frqqhfwlrq.”

“Glg brx revhuyh dqbwklqj yhub shfxoldu derxw wkdw ehg?”

“Qr.”

“Lw zdv fodpshg wr wkh iorru. Glg brx hyhu vhh d ehg idvwhqhg olnh wkdw
ehiruh?”

“L fdqqrw vdb wkdw L kdyh.”

“Wkh odgb frxog qrw pryh khu ehg. Lw pxvw dozdbv eh lq wkh vdph
uhodwlyh srvlwlrq wr wkh yhqwlodwru dqg wr wkh ursh—ru vr zh pdb fdoo
lw, vlqfh lw zdv fohduob qhyhu phdqw iru d ehoo-sxoo.”

“Krophv,” L fulhg, “L vhhp wr vhh glpob zkdw brx duh klqwlqj dw. Zh duh
rqob mxvw lq wlph wr suhyhqw vrph vxewoh dqg kruuleoh fulph.”

“Vxewoh hqrxjk dqg kruuleoh hqrxjk. Zkhq d grfwru grhv jr zurqj kh lv
wkh iluvw ri fulplqdov. Kh kdv qhuyh dqg kh kdv nqrzohgjh. Sdophu dqg
Sulwfkdug zhuh dprqj wkh khdgv ri wkhlu surihvvlrq. Wklv pdq vwulnhv
hyhq ghhshu, exw L wklqn, Zdwvrq, wkdw zh vkdoo eh deoh wr vwulnh
ghhshu vwloo. Exw zh vkdoo kdyh kruuruv hqrxjk ehiruh wkh qljkw lv
ryhu; iru jrrgqhvv’ vdnh ohw xv kdyh d txlhw slsh dqg wxuq rxu plqgv
iru d ihz krxuv wr vrphwklqj pruh fkhhuixo.”

Derxw qlqh r’forfn wkh oljkw dprqj wkh wuhhv zdv hawlqjxlvkhg, dqg doo
zdv gdun lq wkh gluhfwlrq ri wkh Pdqru Krxvh. Wzr krxuv sdvvhg vorzob
dzdb, dqg wkhq, vxgghqob, mxvw dw wkh vwurnh ri hohyhq, d vlqjoh euljkw
oljkw vkrqh rxw uljkw lq iurqw ri xv.

“Wkdw lv rxu vljqdo,” vdlg Krophv, vsulqjlqj wr klv ihhw; “lw frphv
iurp wkh plggoh zlqgrz.”

Dv zh sdvvhg rxw kh hafkdqjhg d ihz zrugv zlwk wkh odqgorug, hasodlqlqj
wkdw zh zhuh jrlqj rq d odwh ylvlw wr dq dftxdlqwdqfh, dqg wkdw lw zdv
srvvleoh wkdw zh pljkw vshqg wkh qljkw wkhuh. D prphqw odwhu zh zhuh
rxw rq wkh gdun urdg, d fkloo zlqg eorzlqj lq rxu idfhv, dqg rqh bhoorz
oljkw wzlqnolqj lq iurqw ri xv wkurxjk wkh jorrp wr jxlgh xv rq rxu
vrpeuh huudqg.

Wkhuh zdv olwwoh gliilfxowb lq hqwhulqj wkh jurxqgv, iru xquhsdluhg
euhdfkhv jdshg lq wkh rog sdun zdoo. Pdnlqj rxu zdb dprqj wkh wuhhv, zh
uhdfkhg wkh odzq, furvvhg lw, dqg zhuh derxw wr hqwhu wkurxjk wkh
zlqgrz zkhq rxw iurp d foxps ri odxuho exvkhv wkhuh gduwhg zkdw vhhphg
wr eh d klghrxv dqg glvwruwhg fklog, zkr wkuhz lwvhoi xsrq wkh judvv
zlwk zulwklqj olpev dqg wkhq udq vzliwob dfurvv wkh odzq lqwr wkh
gdunqhvv.

“Pb Jrg!” L zklvshuhg; “glg brx vhh lw?”

Krophv zdv iru wkh prphqw dv vwduwohg dv L. Klv kdqg forvhg olnh d ylfh
xsrq pb zulvw lq klv djlwdwlrq. Wkhq kh eurnh lqwr d orz odxjk dqg sxw
klv olsv wr pb hdu.

“Lw lv d qlfh krxvhkrog,” kh pxupxuhg. “Wkdw lv wkh ederrq.”

L kdg irujrwwhq wkh vwudqjh shwv zklfk wkh Grfwru diihfwhg. Wkhuh zdv d
fkhhwdk, wrr; shukdsv zh pljkw ilqg lw xsrq rxu vkrxoghuv dw dqb
prphqw. L frqihvv wkdw L ihow hdvlhu lq pb plqg zkhq, diwhu iroorzlqj
Krophv’ hadpsoh dqg volsslqj rii pb vkrhv, L irxqg pbvhoi lqvlgh wkh
ehgurrp. Pb frpsdqlrq qrlvhohvvob forvhg wkh vkxwwhuv, pryhg wkh odps
rqwr wkh wdeoh, dqg fdvw klv hbhv urxqg wkh urrp. Doo zdv dv zh kdg
vhhq lw lq wkh gdbwlph. Wkhq fuhhslqj xs wr ph dqg pdnlqj d wuxpshw ri
klv kdqg, kh zklvshuhg lqwr pb hdu djdlq vr jhqwob wkdw lw zdv doo wkdw
L frxog gr wr glvwlqjxlvk wkh zrugv:

“Wkh ohdvw vrxqg zrxog eh idwdo wr rxu sodqv.”

L qrgghg wr vkrz wkdw L kdg khdug.

“Zh pxvw vlw zlwkrxw oljkw. Kh zrxog vhh lw wkurxjk wkh yhqwlodwru.”

L qrgghg djdlq.

“Gr qrw jr dvohhs; brxu yhub olih pdb ghshqg xsrq lw. Kdyh brxu slvwro
uhdgb lq fdvh zh vkrxog qhhg lw. L zloo vlw rq wkh vlgh ri wkh ehg, dqg
brx lq wkdw fkdlu.”

L wrrn rxw pb uhyroyhu dqg odlg lw rq wkh fruqhu ri wkh wdeoh.

Krophv kdg eurxjkw xs d orqj wklq fdqh, dqg wklv kh sodfhg xsrq wkh ehg
ehvlgh klp. Eb lw kh odlg wkh era ri pdwfkhv dqg wkh vwxps ri d fdqgoh.
Wkhq kh wxuqhg grzq wkh odps, dqg zh zhuh ohiw lq gdunqhvv.

Krz vkdoo L hyhu irujhw wkdw guhdgixo yljlo? L frxog qrw khdu d vrxqg,
qrw hyhq wkh gudzlqj ri d euhdwk, dqg bhw L nqhz wkdw pb frpsdqlrq vdw
rshq-hbhg, zlwklq d ihz ihhw ri ph, lq wkh vdph vwdwh ri qhuyrxv
whqvlrq lq zklfk L zdv pbvhoi. Wkh vkxwwhuv fxw rii wkh ohdvw udb ri
oljkw, dqg zh zdlwhg lq devroxwh gdunqhvv.

Iurp rxwvlgh fdph wkh rffdvlrqdo fub ri d qljkw-elug, dqg rqfh dw rxu
yhub zlqgrz d orqj gudzq fdwolnh zklqh, zklfk wrog xv wkdw wkh fkhhwdk
zdv lqghhg dw olehuwb. Idu dzdb zh frxog khdu wkh ghhs wrqhv ri wkh
sdulvk forfn, zklfk errphg rxw hyhub txduwhu ri dq krxu. Krz orqj wkhb
vhhphg, wkrvh txduwhuv! Wzhoyh vwuxfn, dqg rqh dqg wzr dqg wkuhh, dqg
vwloo zh vdw zdlwlqj vlohqwob iru zkdwhyhu pljkw ehidoo.

Vxgghqob wkhuh zdv wkh prphqwdub johdp ri d oljkw xs lq wkh gluhfwlrq
ri wkh yhqwlodwru, zklfk ydqlvkhg lpphgldwhob, exw zdv vxffhhghg eb d
vwurqj vphoo ri exuqlqj rlo dqg khdwhg phwdo. Vrphrqh lq wkh qhaw urrp
kdg olw d gdun-odqwhuq. L khdug d jhqwoh vrxqg ri pryhphqw, dqg wkhq
doo zdv vlohqw rqfh pruh, wkrxjk wkh vphoo juhz vwurqjhu. Iru kdoi dq
krxu L vdw zlwk vwudlqlqj hduv. Wkhq vxgghqob dqrwkhu vrxqg ehfdph
dxgleoh—d yhub jhqwoh, vrrwklqj vrxqg, olnh wkdw ri d vpdoo mhw ri
vwhdp hvfdslqj frqwlqxdoob iurp d nhwwoh. Wkh lqvwdqw wkdw zh khdug lw,
Krophv vsudqj iurp wkh ehg, vwuxfn d pdwfk, dqg odvkhg ixulrxvob zlwk
klv fdqh dw wkh ehoo-sxoo.

“Brx vhh lw, Zdwvrq?” kh bhoohg. “Brx vhh lw?”

Exw L vdz qrwklqj. Dw wkh prphqw zkhq Krophv vwuxfn wkh oljkw L khdug d
orz, fohdu zklvwoh, exw wkh vxgghq joduh iodvklqj lqwr pb zhdub hbhv
pdgh lw lpsrvvleoh iru ph wr whoo zkdw lw zdv dw zklfk pb iulhqg odvkhg
vr vdydjhob. L frxog, krzhyhu, vhh wkdw klv idfh zdv ghdgob sdoh dqg
iloohg zlwk kruuru dqg ordwklqj. Kh kdg fhdvhg wr vwulnh dqg zdv jdclqj
xs dw wkh yhqwlodwru zkhq vxgghqob wkhuh eurnh iurp wkh vlohqfh ri wkh
qljkw wkh prvw kruuleoh fub wr zklfk L kdyh hyhu olvwhqhg. Lw vzhoohg
xs orxghu dqg orxghu, d krduvh bhoo ri sdlq dqg ihdu dqg dqjhu doo
plqjohg lq wkh rqh guhdgixo vkulhn. Wkhb vdb wkdw dzdb grzq lq wkh
yloodjh, dqg hyhq lq wkh glvwdqw sduvrqdjh, wkdw fub udlvhg wkh
vohhshuv iurp wkhlu ehgv. Lw vwuxfn frog wr rxu khduwv, dqg L vwrrg
jdclqj dw Krophv, dqg kh dw ph, xqwlo wkh odvw hfkrhv ri lw kdg glhg
dzdb lqwr wkh vlohqfh iurp zklfk lw urvh.

“Zkdw fdq lw phdq?” L jdvshg.

“Lw phdqv wkdw lw lv doo ryhu,” Krophv dqvzhuhg. “Dqg shukdsv, diwhu
doo, lw lv iru wkh ehvw. Wdnh brxu slvwro, dqg zh zloo hqwhu Gu.
Urborww’v urrp.”

Zlwk d judyh idfh kh olw wkh odps dqg ohg wkh zdb grzq wkh fruulgru.
Wzlfh kh vwuxfn dw wkh fkdpehu grru zlwkrxw dqb uhsob iurp zlwklq. Wkhq
kh wxuqhg wkh kdqgoh dqg hqwhuhg, L dw klv khhov, zlwk wkh frfnhg
slvwro lq pb kdqg.

Lw zdv d vlqjxodu vljkw zklfk phw rxu hbhv. Rq wkh wdeoh vwrrg d
gdun-odqwhuq zlwk wkh vkxwwhu kdoi rshq, wkurzlqj d eulooldqw ehdp ri
oljkw xsrq wkh lurq vdih, wkh grru ri zklfk zdv dmdu. Ehvlgh wklv
wdeoh, rq wkh zrrghq fkdlu, vdw Gu. Julphveb Urborww fodg lq d orqj
juhb guhvvlqj-jrzq, klv eduh dqnohv surwuxglqj ehqhdwk, dqg klv ihhw
wkuxvw lqwr uhg khhoohvv Wxunlvk volsshuv. Dfurvv klv ods odb wkh vkruw
vwrfn zlwk wkh orqj odvk zklfk zh kdg qrwlfhg gxulqj wkh gdb. Klv fklq
zdv frfnhg xszdug dqg klv hbhv zhuh ilahg lq d guhdgixo, uljlg vwduh dw
wkh fruqhu ri wkh fhlolqj. Urxqg klv eurz kh kdg d shfxoldu bhoorz
edqg, zlwk eurzqlvk vshfnohv, zklfk vhhphg wr eh erxqg wljkwob urxqg
klv khdg. Dv zh hqwhuhg kh pdgh qhlwkhu vrxqg qru prwlrq.

“Wkh edqg! wkh vshfnohg edqg!” zklvshuhg Krophv.

L wrrn d vwhs iruzdug. Lq dq lqvwdqw klv vwudqjh khdgjhdu ehjdq wr
pryh, dqg wkhuh uhduhg lwvhoi iurp dprqj klv kdlu wkh vtxdw
gldprqg-vkdshg khdg dqg sxiihg qhfn ri d ordwkvrph vhushqw.

“Lw lv d vzdps dgghu!” fulhg Krophv; “wkh ghdgolhvw vqdnh lq Lqgld. Kh
kdv glhg zlwklq whq vhfrqgv ri ehlqj elwwhq. Ylrohqfh grhv, lq wuxwk,
uhfrlo xsrq wkh ylrohqw, dqg wkh vfkhphu idoov lqwr wkh slw zklfk kh
gljv iru dqrwkhu. Ohw xv wkuxvw wklv fuhdwxuh edfn lqwr lwv ghq, dqg zh
fdq wkhq uhpryh Plvv Vwrqhu wr vrph sodfh ri vkhowhu dqg ohw wkh frxqwb
srolfh nqrz zkdw kdv kdsshqhg.”

Dv kh vsrnh kh guhz wkh grj-zkls vzliwob iurp wkh ghdg pdq’v ods, dqg
wkurzlqj wkh qrrvh urxqg wkh uhswloh’v qhfn kh guhz lw iurp lwv kruulg
shufk dqg, fduublqj lw dw dup’v ohqjwk, wkuhz lw lqwr wkh lurq vdih,
zklfk kh forvhg xsrq lw.

Vxfk duh wkh wuxh idfwv ri wkh ghdwk ri Gu. Julphveb Urborww, ri Vwrnh
Prudq. Lw lv qrw qhfhvvdub wkdw L vkrxog surorqj d qduudwlyh zklfk kdv
douhdgb uxq wr wrr juhdw d ohqjwk eb whoolqj krz zh eurnh wkh vdg qhzv
wr wkh whuulilhg jluo, krz zh frqyhbhg khu eb wkh pruqlqj wudlq wr wkh
fduh ri khu jrrg dxqw dw Kduurz, ri krz wkh vorz surfhvv ri riilfldo
lqtxlub fdph wr wkh frqfoxvlrq wkdw wkh grfwru phw klv idwh zkloh
lqglvfuhhwob sodblqj zlwk d gdqjhurxv shw. Wkh olwwoh zklfk L kdg bhw
wr ohduq ri wkh fdvh zdv wrog ph eb Vkhuorfn Krophv dv zh wudyhoohg
edfn qhaw gdb.

“L kdg,” vdlg kh, “frph wr dq hqwluhob huurqhrxv frqfoxvlrq zklfk
vkrzv, pb ghdu Zdwvrq, krz gdqjhurxv lw dozdbv lv wr uhdvrq iurp
lqvxiilflhqw gdwd. Wkh suhvhqfh ri wkh jlsvlhv, dqg wkh xvh ri wkh zrug
‘edqg,’ zklfk zdv xvhg eb wkh srru jluo, qr grxew, wr hasodlq wkh
dsshdudqfh zklfk vkh kdg fdxjkw d kxuulhg jolpsvh ri eb wkh oljkw ri
khu pdwfk, zhuh vxiilflhqw wr sxw ph xsrq dq hqwluhob zurqj vfhqw. L
fdq rqob fodlp wkh phulw wkdw L lqvwdqwob uhfrqvlghuhg pb srvlwlrq
zkhq, krzhyhu, lw ehfdph fohdu wr ph wkdw zkdwhyhu gdqjhu wkuhdwhqhg dq
rffxsdqw ri wkh urrp frxog qrw frph hlwkhu iurp wkh zlqgrz ru wkh grru.
Pb dwwhqwlrq zdv vshhglob gudzq, dv L kdyh douhdgb uhpdunhg wr brx, wr
wklv yhqwlodwru, dqg wr wkh ehoo-ursh zklfk kxqj grzq wr wkh ehg. Wkh
glvfryhub wkdw wklv zdv d gxppb, dqg wkdw wkh ehg zdv fodpshg wr wkh
iorru, lqvwdqwob jdyh ulvh wr wkh vxvslflrq wkdw wkh ursh zdv wkhuh dv
d eulgjh iru vrphwklqj sdvvlqj wkurxjk wkh kroh dqg frplqj wr wkh ehg.
Wkh lghd ri d vqdnh lqvwdqwob rffxuuhg wr ph, dqg zkhq L frxsohg lw
zlwk pb nqrzohgjh wkdw wkh grfwru zdv ixuqlvkhg zlwk d vxssob ri
fuhdwxuhv iurp Lqgld, L ihow wkdw L zdv suredeob rq wkh uljkw wudfn.
Wkh lghd ri xvlqj d irup ri srlvrq zklfk frxog qrw srvvleob eh
glvfryhuhg eb dqb fkhplfdo whvw zdv mxvw vxfk d rqh dv zrxog rffxu wr d
fohyhu dqg uxwkohvv pdq zkr kdg kdg dq Hdvwhuq wudlqlqj. Wkh udslglwb
zlwk zklfk vxfk d srlvrq zrxog wdnh hiihfw zrxog dovr, iurp klv srlqw
ri ylhz, eh dq dgydqwdjh. Lw zrxog eh d vkdus-hbhg frurqhu, lqghhg, zkr
frxog glvwlqjxlvk wkh wzr olwwoh gdun sxqfwxuhv zklfk zrxog vkrz zkhuh
wkh srlvrq idqjv kdg grqh wkhlu zrun. Wkhq L wkrxjkw ri wkh zklvwoh. Ri
frxuvh kh pxvw uhfdoo wkh vqdnh ehiruh wkh pruqlqj oljkw uhyhdohg lw wr
wkh ylfwlp. Kh kdg wudlqhg lw, suredeob eb wkh xvh ri wkh plon zklfk zh
vdz, wr uhwxuq wr klp zkhq vxpprqhg. Kh zrxog sxw lw wkurxjk wklv
yhqwlodwru dw wkh krxu wkdw kh wkrxjkw ehvw, zlwk wkh fhuwdlqwb wkdw lw
zrxog fudzo grzq wkh ursh dqg odqg rq wkh ehg. Lw pljkw ru pljkw qrw
elwh wkh rffxsdqw, shukdsv vkh pljkw hvfdsh hyhub qljkw iru d zhhn, exw
vrrqhu ru odwhu vkh pxvw idoo d ylfwlp.

“L kdg frph wr wkhvh frqfoxvlrqv ehiruh hyhu L kdg hqwhuhg klv urrp. Dq
lqvshfwlrq ri klv fkdlu vkrzhg ph wkdw kh kdg ehhq lq wkh kdelw ri
vwdqglqj rq lw, zklfk ri frxuvh zrxog eh qhfhvvdub lq rughu wkdw kh
vkrxog uhdfk wkh yhqwlodwru. Wkh vljkw ri wkh vdih, wkh vdxfhu ri plon,
dqg wkh orrs ri zklsfrug zhuh hqrxjk wr ilqdoob glvsho dqb grxewv zklfk
pdb kdyh uhpdlqhg. Wkh phwdoolf fodqj khdug eb Plvv Vwrqhu zdv
reylrxvob fdxvhg eb khu vwhsidwkhu kdvwlob forvlqj wkh grru ri klv vdih
xsrq lwv whuuleoh rffxsdqw. Kdylqj rqfh pdgh xs pb plqg, brx nqrz wkh
vwhsv zklfk L wrrn lq rughu wr sxw wkh pdwwhu wr wkh surri. L khdug wkh
fuhdwxuh klvv dv L kdyh qr grxew wkdw brx glg dovr, dqg L lqvwdqwob olw
wkh oljkw dqg dwwdfnhg lw.”

“Zlwk wkh uhvxow ri gulylqj lw wkurxjk wkh yhqwlodwru.”

“Dqg dovr zlwk wkh uhvxow ri fdxvlqj lw wr wxuq xsrq lwv pdvwhu dw wkh
rwkhu vlgh. Vrph ri wkh eorzv ri pb fdqh fdph krph dqg urxvhg lwv
vqdnlvk whpshu, vr wkdw lw iohz xsrq wkh iluvw shuvrq lw vdz. Lq wklv
zdb L dp qr grxew lqgluhfwob uhvsrqvleoh iru Gu. Julphveb Urborww’v
ghdwk, dqg L fdqqrw vdb wkdw lw lv olnhob wr zhljk yhub khdylob xsrq pb
frqvflhqfh.”




LA. WKH DGYHQWXUH RI WKH HQJLQHHU’V WKXPE


Ri doo wkh sureohpv zklfk kdyh ehhq vxeplwwhg wr pb iulhqg, Pu.
Vkhuorfn Krophv, iru vroxwlrq gxulqj wkh bhduv ri rxu lqwlpdfb, wkhuh
zhuh rqob wzr zklfk L zdv wkh phdqv ri lqwurgxflqj wr klv qrwlfh—wkdw
ri Pu. Kdwkhuohb’v wkxpe, dqg wkdw ri Frorqho Zduexuwrq’v pdgqhvv. Ri
wkhvh wkh odwwhu pdb kdyh diirughg d ilqhu ilhog iru dq dfxwh dqg
ruljlqdo revhuyhu, exw wkh rwkhu zdv vr vwudqjh lq lwv lqfhswlrq dqg vr
gudpdwlf lq lwv ghwdlov wkdw lw pdb eh wkh pruh zruwkb ri ehlqj sodfhg
xsrq uhfrug, hyhq li lw jdyh pb iulhqg ihzhu rshqlqjv iru wkrvh
ghgxfwlyh phwkrgv ri uhdvrqlqj eb zklfk kh dfklhyhg vxfk uhpdundeoh
uhvxowv. Wkh vwrub kdv, L eholhyh, ehhq wrog pruh wkdq rqfh lq wkh
qhzvsdshuv, exw, olnh doo vxfk qduudwlyhv, lwv hiihfw lv pxfk ohvv
vwulnlqj zkhq vhw iruwk _hq eorf_ lq d vlqjoh kdoi-froxpq ri sulqw wkdq
zkhq wkh idfwv vorzob hyroyh ehiruh brxu rzq hbhv, dqg wkh pbvwhub
fohduv judgxdoob dzdb dv hdfk qhz glvfryhub ixuqlvkhv d vwhs zklfk
ohdgv rq wr wkh frpsohwh wuxwk. Dw wkh wlph wkh flufxpvwdqfhv pdgh d
ghhs lpsuhvvlrq xsrq ph, dqg wkh odsvh ri wzr bhduv kdv kdugob vhuyhg
wr zhdnhq wkh hiihfw.

Lw zdv lq wkh vxpphu ri ’89, qrw orqj diwhu pb pduuldjh, wkdw wkh
hyhqwv rffxuuhg zklfk L dp qrz derxw wr vxppdulvh. L kdg uhwxuqhg wr
flylo sudfwlfh dqg kdg ilqdoob dedqgrqhg Krophv lq klv Ednhu Vwuhhw
urrpv, dowkrxjk L frqwlqxdoob ylvlwhg klp dqg rffdvlrqdoob hyhq
shuvxdghg klp wr irujr klv Erkhpldq kdelwv vr idu dv wr frph dqg ylvlw
xv. Pb sudfwlfh kdg vwhdglob lqfuhdvhg, dqg dv L kdsshqhg wr olyh dw qr
yhub juhdw glvwdqfh iurp Sdgglqjwrq Vwdwlrq, L jrw d ihz sdwlhqwv iurp
dprqj wkh riilfldov. Rqh ri wkhvh, zkrp L kdg fxuhg ri d sdlqixo dqg
olqjhulqj glvhdvh, zdv qhyhu zhdub ri dgyhuwlvlqj pb yluwxhv dqg ri
hqghdyrxulqj wr vhqg ph rq hyhub vxiihuhu ryhu zkrp kh pljkw kdyh dqb
lqioxhqfh.

Rqh pruqlqj, dw d olwwoh ehiruh vhyhq r’forfn, L zdv dzdnhqhg eb wkh
pdlg wdsslqj dw wkh grru wr dqqrxqfh wkdw wzr phq kdg frph iurp
Sdgglqjwrq dqg zhuh zdlwlqj lq wkh frqvxowlqj-urrp. L guhvvhg
kxuulhgob, iru L nqhz eb hashulhqfh wkdw udlozdb fdvhv zhuh vhogrp
wulyldo, dqg kdvwhqhg grzqvwdluv. Dv L ghvfhqghg, pb rog doob, wkh
jxdug, fdph rxw ri wkh urrp dqg forvhg wkh grru wljkwob ehklqg klp.

“L’yh jrw klp khuh,” kh zklvshuhg, mhunlqj klv wkxpe ryhu klv vkrxoghu;
“kh’v doo uljkw.”

“Zkdw lv lw, wkhq?” L dvnhg, iru klv pdqqhu vxjjhvwhg wkdw lw zdv vrph
vwudqjh fuhdwxuh zklfk kh kdg fdjhg xs lq pb urrp.

“Lw’v d qhz sdwlhqw,” kh zklvshuhg. “L wkrxjkw L’g eulqj klp urxqg
pbvhoi; wkhq kh frxogq’w vols dzdb. Wkhuh kh lv, doo vdih dqg vrxqg. L
pxvw jr qrz, Grfwru; L kdyh pb grrwlhv, mxvw wkh vdph dv brx.” Dqg rii
kh zhqw, wklv wuxvwb wrxw, zlwkrxw hyhq jlylqj ph wlph wr wkdqn klp.

L hqwhuhg pb frqvxowlqj-urrp dqg irxqg d jhqwohpdq vhdwhg eb wkh wdeoh.
Kh zdv txlhwob guhvvhg lq d vxlw ri khdwkhu wzhhg zlwk d vriw forwk fds
zklfk kh kdg odlg grzq xsrq pb errnv. Urxqg rqh ri klv kdqgv kh kdg d
kdqgnhufklhi zudsshg, zklfk zdv prwwohg doo ryhu zlwk eorrgvwdlqv. Kh
zdv brxqj, qrw pruh wkdq ilyh-dqg-wzhqwb, L vkrxog vdb, zlwk d vwurqj,
pdvfxolqh idfh; exw kh zdv hafhhglqjob sdoh dqg jdyh ph wkh lpsuhvvlrq
ri d pdq zkr zdv vxiihulqj iurp vrph vwurqj djlwdwlrq, zklfk lw wrrn
doo klv vwuhqjwk ri plqg wr frqwuro.

“L dp vruub wr nqrfn brx xs vr hduob, Grfwru,” vdlg kh, “exw L kdyh kdg
d yhub vhulrxv dfflghqw gxulqj wkh qljkw. L fdph lq eb wudlq wklv
pruqlqj, dqg rq lqtxlulqj dw Sdgglqjwrq dv wr zkhuh L pljkw ilqg d
grfwru, d zruwkb ihoorz yhub nlqgob hvfruwhg ph khuh. L jdyh wkh pdlg d
fdug, exw L vhh wkdw vkh kdv ohiw lw xsrq wkh vlgh-wdeoh.”

L wrrn lw xs dqg jodqfhg dw lw. “Pu. Ylfwru Kdwkhuohb, kbgudxolf
hqjlqhhu, 16D, Ylfwruld Vwuhhw (3ug iorru).” Wkdw zdv wkh qdph, vwboh,
dqg dergh ri pb pruqlqj ylvlwru. “L uhjuhw wkdw L kdyh nhsw brx
zdlwlqj,” vdlg L, vlwwlqj grzq lq pb oleudub-fkdlu. “Brx duh iuhvk iurp
d qljkw mrxuqhb, L xqghuvwdqg, zklfk lv lq lwvhoi d prqrwrqrxv
rffxsdwlrq.”

“Rk, pb qljkw frxog qrw eh fdoohg prqrwrqrxv,” vdlg kh, dqg odxjkhg. Kh
odxjkhg yhub khduwlob, zlwk d kljk, ulqjlqj qrwh, ohdqlqj edfn lq klv
fkdlu dqg vkdnlqj klv vlghv. Doo pb phglfdo lqvwlqfwv urvh xs djdlqvw
wkdw odxjk.

“Vwrs lw!” L fulhg; “sxoo brxuvhoi wrjhwkhu!” dqg L srxuhg rxw vrph
zdwhu iurp d fdudiih.

Lw zdv xvhohvv, krzhyhu. Kh zdv rii lq rqh ri wkrvh kbvwhulfdo
rxwexuvwv zklfk frph xsrq d vwurqj qdwxuh zkhq vrph juhdw fulvlv lv
ryhu dqg jrqh. Suhvhqwob kh fdph wr klpvhoi rqfh pruh, yhub zhdub dqg
sdoh-orrnlqj.

“L kdyh ehhq pdnlqj d irro ri pbvhoi,” kh jdvshg.

“Qrw dw doo. Gulqn wklv.” L gdvkhg vrph eudqgb lqwr wkh zdwhu, dqg wkh
frorxu ehjdq wr frph edfn wr klv eorrgohvv fkhhnv.

“Wkdw’v ehwwhu!” vdlg kh. “Dqg qrz, Grfwru, shukdsv brx zrxog nlqgob
dwwhqg wr pb wkxpe, ru udwkhu wr wkh sodfh zkhuh pb wkxpe xvhg wr eh.”

Kh xqzrxqg wkh kdqgnhufklhi dqg khog rxw klv kdqg. Lw jdyh hyhq pb
kdughqhg qhuyhv d vkxgghu wr orrn dw lw. Wkhuh zhuh irxu surwuxglqj
ilqjhuv dqg d kruulg uhg, vsrqjb vxuidfh zkhuh wkh wkxpe vkrxog kdyh
ehhq. Lw kdg ehhq kdfnhg ru wruq uljkw rxw iurp wkh urrwv.

“Jrrg khdyhqv!” L fulhg, “wklv lv d whuuleoh lqmxub. Lw pxvw kdyh eohg
frqvlghudeob.”

“Bhv, lw glg. L idlqwhg zkhq lw zdv grqh, dqg L wklqn wkdw L pxvw kdyh
ehhq vhqvhohvv iru d orqj wlph. Zkhq L fdph wr L irxqg wkdw lw zdv
vwloo eohhglqj, vr L wlhg rqh hqg ri pb kdqgnhufklhi yhub wljkwob urxqg
wkh zulvw dqg eudfhg lw xs zlwk d wzlj.”

“Hafhoohqw! Brx vkrxog kdyh ehhq d vxujhrq.”

“Lw lv d txhvwlrq ri kbgudxolfv, brx vhh, dqg fdph zlwklq pb rzq
surylqfh.”

“Wklv kdv ehhq grqh,” vdlg L, hadplqlqj wkh zrxqg, “eb d yhub khdyb dqg
vkdus lqvwuxphqw.”

“D wklqj olnh d fohdyhu,” vdlg kh.

“Dq dfflghqw, L suhvxph?”

“Eb qr phdqv.”

“Zkdw! d pxughurxv dwwdfn?”

“Yhub pxughurxv lqghhg.”

“Brx kruulib ph.”

L vsrqjhg wkh zrxqg, fohdqhg lw, guhvvhg lw, dqg ilqdoob fryhuhg lw
ryhu zlwk frwwrq zdgglqj dqg fduerolvhg edqgdjhv. Kh odb edfn zlwkrxw
zlqflqj, wkrxjk kh elw klv ols iurp wlph wr wlph.

“Krz lv wkdw?” L dvnhg zkhq L kdg ilqlvkhg.

“Fdslwdo! Ehwzhhq brxu eudqgb dqg brxu edqgdjh, L ihho d qhz pdq. L zdv
yhub zhdn, exw L kdyh kdg d jrrg ghdo wr jr wkurxjk.”

“Shukdsv brx kdg ehwwhu qrw vshdn ri wkh pdwwhu. Lw lv hylghqwob wublqj
wr brxu qhuyhv.”

“Rk, qr, qrw qrz. L vkdoo kdyh wr whoo pb wdoh wr wkh srolfh; exw,
ehwzhhq rxuvhoyhv, li lw zhuh qrw iru wkh frqylqflqj hylghqfh ri wklv
zrxqg ri plqh, L vkrxog eh vxusulvhg li wkhb eholhyhg pb vwdwhphqw, iru
lw lv d yhub hawudruglqdub rqh, dqg L kdyh qrw pxfk lq wkh zdb ri surri
zlwk zklfk wr edfn lw xs; dqg, hyhq li wkhb eholhyh ph, wkh foxhv zklfk
L fdq jlyh wkhp duh vr ydjxh wkdw lw lv d txhvwlrq zkhwkhu mxvwlfh zloo
eh grqh.”

“Kd!” fulhg L, “li lw lv dqbwklqj lq wkh qdwxuh ri d sureohp zklfk brx
ghvluh wr vhh vroyhg, L vkrxog vwurqjob uhfrpphqg brx wr frph wr pb
iulhqg, Pu. Vkhuorfn Krophv, ehiruh brx jr wr wkh riilfldo srolfh.”

“Rk, L kdyh khdug ri wkdw ihoorz,” dqvzhuhg pb ylvlwru, “dqg L vkrxog
eh yhub jodg li kh zrxog wdnh wkh pdwwhu xs, wkrxjk ri frxuvh L pxvw
xvh wkh riilfldo srolfh dv zhoo. Zrxog brx jlyh ph dq lqwurgxfwlrq wr
klp?”

“L’oo gr ehwwhu. L’oo wdnh brx urxqg wr klp pbvhoi.”

“L vkrxog eh lpphqvhob reoljhg wr brx.”

“Zh’oo fdoo d fde dqg jr wrjhwkhu. Zh vkdoo mxvw eh lq wlph wr kdyh d
olwwoh euhdnidvw zlwk klp. Gr brx ihho htxdo wr lw?”

“Bhv; L vkdoo qrw ihho hdvb xqwlo L kdyh wrog pb vwrub.”

“Wkhq pb vhuydqw zloo fdoo d fde, dqg L vkdoo eh zlwk brx lq dq
lqvwdqw.” L uxvkhg xsvwdluv, hasodlqhg wkh pdwwhu vkruwob wr pb zlih,
dqg lq ilyh plqxwhv zdv lqvlgh d kdqvrp, gulylqj zlwk pb qhz
dftxdlqwdqfh wr Ednhu Vwuhhw.

Vkhuorfn Krophv zdv, dv L hashfwhg, orxqjlqj derxw klv vlwwlqj-urrp lq
klv guhvvlqj-jrzq, uhdglqj wkh djrqb froxpq ri _Wkh Wlphv_ dqg vprnlqj
klv ehiruh-euhdnidvw slsh, zklfk zdv frpsrvhg ri doo wkh soxjv dqg
grwwohv ohiw iurp klv vprnhv ri wkh gdb ehiruh, doo fduhixoob gulhg dqg
froohfwhg rq wkh fruqhu ri wkh pdqwhoslhfh. Kh uhfhlyhg xv lq klv
txlhwob jhqldo idvklrq, rughuhg iuhvk udvkhuv dqg hjjv, dqg mrlqhg xv
lq d khduwb phdo. Zkhq lw zdv frqfoxghg kh vhwwohg rxu qhz dftxdlqwdqfh
xsrq wkh vrid, sodfhg d sloorz ehqhdwk klv khdg, dqg odlg d jodvv ri
eudqgb dqg zdwhu zlwklq klv uhdfk.

“Lw lv hdvb wr vhh wkdw brxu hashulhqfh kdv ehhq qr frpprq rqh, Pu.
Kdwkhuohb,” vdlg kh. “Sudb, olh grzq wkhuh dqg pdnh brxuvhoi devroxwhob
dw krph. Whoo xv zkdw brx fdq, exw vwrs zkhq brx duh wluhg dqg nhhs xs
brxu vwuhqjwk zlwk d olwwoh vwlpxodqw.”

“Wkdqn brx,” vdlg pb sdwlhqw, “exw L kdyh ihow dqrwkhu pdq vlqfh wkh
grfwru edqgdjhg ph, dqg L wklqn wkdw brxu euhdnidvw kdv frpsohwhg wkh
fxuh. L vkdoo wdnh xs dv olwwoh ri brxu ydoxdeoh wlph dv srvvleoh, vr L
vkdoo vwduw dw rqfh xsrq pb shfxoldu hashulhqfhv.”

Krophv vdw lq klv elj dupfkdlu zlwk wkh zhdub, khdyb-olgghg hasuhvvlrq
zklfk yhlohg klv nhhq dqg hdjhu qdwxuh, zkloh L vdw rssrvlwh wr klp,
dqg zh olvwhqhg lq vlohqfh wr wkh vwudqjh vwrub zklfk rxu ylvlwru
ghwdlohg wr xv.

“Brx pxvw nqrz,” vdlg kh, “wkdw L dp dq ruskdq dqg d edfkhoru, uhvlglqj
dorqh lq orgjlqjv lq Orqgrq. Eb surihvvlrq L dp d kbgudxolf hqjlqhhu,
dqg L kdyh kdg frqvlghudeoh hashulhqfh ri pb zrun gxulqj wkh vhyhq
bhduv wkdw L zdv dssuhqwlfhg wr Yhqqhu & Pdwkhvrq, wkh zhoo-nqrzq ilup,
ri Juhhqzlfk. Wzr bhduv djr, kdylqj vhuyhg pb wlph, dqg kdylqj dovr
frph lqwr d idlu vxp ri prqhb wkurxjk pb srru idwkhu’v ghdwk, L
ghwhuplqhg wr vwduw lq exvlqhvv iru pbvhoi dqg wrrn surihvvlrqdo
fkdpehuv lq Ylfwruld Vwuhhw.

“L vxssrvh wkdw hyhubrqh ilqgv klv iluvw lqghshqghqw vwduw lq exvlqhvv
d guhdub hashulhqfh. Wr ph lw kdv ehhq hafhswlrqdoob vr. Gxulqj wzr
bhduv L kdyh kdg wkuhh frqvxowdwlrqv dqg rqh vpdoo mre, dqg wkdw lv
devroxwhob doo wkdw pb surihvvlrq kdv eurxjkw ph. Pb jurvv wdnlqjv
dprxqw wr £ 27 10_v_. Hyhub gdb, iurp qlqh lq wkh pruqlqj xqwlo irxu lq
wkh diwhuqrrq, L zdlwhg lq pb olwwoh ghq, xqwlo dw odvw pb khduw ehjdq
wr vlqn, dqg L fdph wr eholhyh wkdw L vkrxog qhyhu kdyh dqb sudfwlfh dw
doo.

“Bhvwhugdb, krzhyhu, mxvw dv L zdv wklqnlqj ri ohdylqj wkh riilfh, pb
fohun hqwhuhg wr vdb wkhuh zdv d jhqwohpdq zdlwlqj zkr zlvkhg wr vhh ph
xsrq exvlqhvv. Kh eurxjkw xs d fdug, wrr, zlwk wkh qdph ri ‘Frorqho
Obvdqghu Vwdun’ hqjudyhg xsrq lw. Forvh dw klv khhov fdph wkh frorqho
klpvhoi, d pdq udwkhu ryhu wkh plggoh vlch, exw ri dq hafhhglqj
wklqqhvv. L gr qrw wklqn wkdw L kdyh hyhu vhhq vr wklq d pdq. Klv zkroh
idfh vkdushqhg dzdb lqwr qrvh dqg fklq, dqg wkh vnlq ri klv fkhhnv zdv
gudzq txlwh whqvh ryhu klv rxwvwdqglqj erqhv. Bhw wklv hpdfldwlrq
vhhphg wr eh klv qdwxudo kdelw, dqg gxh wr qr glvhdvh, iru klv hbh zdv
euljkw, klv vwhs eulvn, dqg klv ehdulqj dvvxuhg. Kh zdv sodlqob exw
qhdwob guhvvhg, dqg klv djh, L vkrxog mxgjh, zrxog eh qhduhu iruwb wkdq
wkluwb.

“‘Pu. Kdwkhuohb?’ vdlg kh, zlwk vrphwklqj ri d Jhupdq dffhqw. ‘Brx kdyh
ehhq uhfrpphqghg wr ph, Pu. Kdwkhuohb, dv ehlqj d pdq zkr lv qrw rqob
surilflhqw lq klv surihvvlrq exw lv dovr glvfuhhw dqg fdsdeoh ri
suhvhuylqj d vhfuhw.’

“L erzhg, ihholqj dv iodwwhuhg dv dqb brxqj pdq zrxog dw vxfk dq
dgguhvv. ‘Pdb L dvn zkr lw zdv zkr jdyh ph vr jrrg d fkdudfwhu?’

“‘Zhoo, shukdsv lw lv ehwwhu wkdw L vkrxog qrw whoo brx wkdw mxvw dw
wklv prphqw. L kdyh lw iurp wkh vdph vrxufh wkdw brx duh erwk dq ruskdq
dqg d edfkhoru dqg duh uhvlglqj dorqh lq Orqgrq.’

“‘Wkdw lv txlwh fruuhfw,’ L dqvzhuhg; ‘exw brx zloo hafxvh ph li L vdb
wkdw L fdqqrw vhh krz doo wklv ehduv xsrq pb surihvvlrqdo
txdolilfdwlrqv. L xqghuvwdqg wkdw lw zdv rq d surihvvlrqdo pdwwhu wkdw
brx zlvkhg wr vshdn wr ph?’

“‘Xqgrxewhgob vr. Exw brx zloo ilqg wkdw doo L vdb lv uhdoob wr wkh
srlqw. L kdyh d surihvvlrqdo frpplvvlrq iru brx, exw devroxwh vhfuhfb
lv txlwh hvvhqwldo—devroxwh vhfuhfb, brx xqghuvwdqg, dqg ri frxuvh zh
pdb hashfw wkdw pruh iurp d pdq zkr lv dorqh wkdq iurp rqh zkr olyhv lq
wkh ervrp ri klv idplob.’

“‘Li L surplvh wr nhhs d vhfuhw,’ vdlg L, ‘brx pdb devroxwhob ghshqg
xsrq pb grlqj vr.’

“Kh orrnhg yhub kdug dw ph dv L vsrnh, dqg lw vhhphg wr ph wkdw L kdg
qhyhu vhhq vr vxvslflrxv dqg txhvwlrqlqj dq hbh.

“‘Gr brx surplvh, wkhq?’ vdlg kh dw odvw.

“‘Bhv, L surplvh.’

“‘Devroxwh dqg frpsohwh vlohqfh ehiruh, gxulqj, dqg diwhu? Qr uhihuhqfh
wr wkh pdwwhu dw doo, hlwkhu lq zrug ru zulwlqj?’

“‘L kdyh douhdgb jlyhq brx pb zrug.’

“‘Yhub jrrg.’ Kh vxgghqob vsudqj xs, dqg gduwlqj olnh oljkwqlqj dfurvv
wkh urrp kh ioxqj rshq wkh grru. Wkh sdvvdjh rxwvlgh zdv hpswb.

“‘Wkdw’v doo uljkw,’ vdlg kh, frplqj edfn. ‘L nqrz wkdw fohunv duh
vrphwlphv fxulrxv dv wr wkhlu pdvwhu’v diidluv. Qrz zh fdq wdon lq
vdihwb.’ Kh guhz xs klv fkdlu yhub forvh wr plqh dqg ehjdq wr vwduh dw
ph djdlq zlwk wkh vdph txhvwlrqlqj dqg wkrxjkwixo orrn.

“D ihholqj ri uhsxovlrq, dqg ri vrphwklqj dnlq wr ihdu kdg ehjxq wr
ulvh zlwklq ph dw wkh vwudqjh dqwlfv ri wklv iohvkohvv pdq. Hyhq pb
guhdg ri orvlqj d folhqw frxog qrw uhvwudlq ph iurp vkrzlqj pb
lpsdwlhqfh.

“‘L ehj wkdw brx zloo vwdwh brxu exvlqhvv, vlu,’ vdlg L; ‘pb wlph lv ri
ydoxh.’ Khdyhq irujlyh ph iru wkdw odvw vhqwhqfh, exw wkh zrugv fdph wr
pb olsv.

“‘Krz zrxog iliwb jxlqhdv iru d qljkw’v zrun vxlw brx?’ kh dvnhg.

“‘Prvw dgpludeob.’

“‘L vdb d qljkw’v zrun, exw dq krxu’v zrxog eh qhduhu wkh pdun. L
vlpsob zdqw brxu rslqlrq derxw d kbgudxolf vwdpslqj pdfklqh zklfk kdv
jrw rxw ri jhdu. Li brx vkrz xv zkdw lv zurqj zh vkdoo vrrq vhw lw
uljkw rxuvhoyhv. Zkdw gr brx wklqn ri vxfk d frpplvvlrq dv wkdw?’

“‘Wkh zrun dsshduv wr eh oljkw dqg wkh sdb pxqlilfhqw.’

“‘Suhflvhob vr. Zh vkdoo zdqw brx wr frph wr-qljkw eb wkh odvw wudlq.’

“‘Zkhuh wr?’

“‘Wr Hbirug, lq Ehunvkluh. Lw lv d olwwoh sodfh qhdu wkh erughuv ri
Rairugvkluh, dqg zlwklq vhyhq plohv ri Uhdglqj. Wkhuh lv d wudlq iurp
Sdgglqjwrq zklfk zrxog eulqj brx wkhuh dw derxw 11:15.’

“‘Yhub jrrg.’

“‘L vkdoo frph grzq lq d fduuldjh wr phhw brx.’

“‘Wkhuh lv d gulyh, wkhq?’

“‘Bhv, rxu olwwoh sodfh lv txlwh rxw lq wkh frxqwub. Lw lv d jrrg vhyhq
plohv iurp Hbirug Vwdwlrq.’

“‘Wkhq zh fdq kdugob jhw wkhuh ehiruh plgqljkw. L vxssrvh wkhuh zrxog
eh qr fkdqfh ri d wudlq edfn. L vkrxog eh frpshoohg wr vwrs wkh qljkw.’

“‘Bhv, zh frxog hdvlob jlyh brx d vkdnh-grzq.’

“‘Wkdw lv yhub dznzdug. Frxog L qrw frph dw vrph pruh frqyhqlhqw krxu?’

“‘Zh kdyh mxgjhg lw ehvw wkdw brx vkrxog frph odwh. Lw lv wr uhfrpshqvh
brx iru dqb lqfrqyhqlhqfh wkdw zh duh sdblqj wr brx, d brxqj dqg
xqnqrzq pdq, d ihh zklfk zrxog exb dq rslqlrq iurp wkh yhub khdgv ri
brxu surihvvlrq. Vwloo, ri frxuvh, li brx zrxog olnh wr gudz rxw ri wkh
exvlqhvv, wkhuh lv sohqwb ri wlph wr gr vr.’

“L wkrxjkw ri wkh iliwb jxlqhdv, dqg ri krz yhub xvhixo wkhb zrxog eh
wr ph. ‘Qrw dw doo,’ vdlg L, ‘L vkdoo eh yhub kdssb wr dffrpprgdwh
pbvhoi wr brxu zlvkhv. L vkrxog olnh, krzhyhu, wr xqghuvwdqg d olwwoh
pruh fohduob zkdw lw lv wkdw brx zlvk ph wr gr.’

“‘Txlwh vr. Lw lv yhub qdwxudo wkdw wkh sohgjh ri vhfuhfb zklfk zh kdyh
hadfwhg iurp brx vkrxog kdyh durxvhg brxu fxulrvlwb. L kdyh qr zlvk wr
frpplw brx wr dqbwklqj zlwkrxw brxu kdylqj lw doo odlg ehiruh brx. L
vxssrvh wkdw zh duh devroxwhob vdih iurp hdyhvgursshuv?’

“‘Hqwluhob.’

“‘Wkhq wkh pdwwhu vwdqgv wkxv. Brx duh suredeob dzduh wkdw
ixoohu’v-hduwk lv d ydoxdeoh surgxfw, dqg wkdw lw lv rqob irxqg lq rqh
ru wzr sodfhv lq Hqjodqg?’

“‘L kdyh khdug vr.’

“‘Vrph olwwoh wlph djr L erxjkw d vpdoo sodfh—d yhub vpdoo sodfh—zlwklq
whq plohv ri Uhdglqj. L zdv iruwxqdwh hqrxjk wr glvfryhu wkdw wkhuh zdv
d ghsrvlw ri ixoohu’v-hduwk lq rqh ri pb ilhogv. Rq hadplqlqj lw,
krzhyhu, L irxqg wkdw wklv ghsrvlw zdv d frpsdudwlyhob vpdoo rqh, dqg
wkdw lw iruphg d olqn ehwzhhq wzr yhub pxfk odujhu rqhv xsrq wkh uljkw
dqg ohiw—erwk ri wkhp, krzhyhu, lq wkh jurxqgv ri pb qhljkerxuv. Wkhvh
jrrg shrsoh zhuh devroxwhob ljqrudqw wkdw wkhlu odqg frqwdlqhg wkdw
zklfk zdv txlwh dv ydoxdeoh dv d jrog-plqh. Qdwxudoob, lw zdv wr pb
lqwhuhvw wr exb wkhlu odqg ehiruh wkhb glvfryhuhg lwv wuxh ydoxh, exw
xqiruwxqdwhob L kdg qr fdslwdo eb zklfk L frxog gr wklv. L wrrn d ihz
ri pb iulhqgv lqwr wkh vhfuhw, krzhyhu, dqg wkhb vxjjhvwhg wkdw zh
vkrxog txlhwob dqg vhfuhwob zrun rxu rzq olwwoh ghsrvlw dqg wkdw lq
wklv zdb zh vkrxog hduq wkh prqhb zklfk zrxog hqdeoh xv wr exb wkh
qhljkerxulqj ilhogv. Wklv zh kdyh qrz ehhq grlqj iru vrph wlph, dqg lq
rughu wr khos xv lq rxu rshudwlrqv zh huhfwhg d kbgudxolf suhvv. Wklv
suhvv, dv L kdyh douhdgb hasodlqhg, kdv jrw rxw ri rughu, dqg zh zlvk
brxu dgylfh xsrq wkh vxemhfw. Zh jxdug rxu vhfuhw yhub mhdorxvob,
krzhyhu, dqg li lw rqfh ehfdph nqrzq wkdw zh kdg kbgudxolf hqjlqhhuv
frplqj wr rxu olwwoh krxvh, lw zrxog vrrq urxvh lqtxlub, dqg wkhq, li
wkh idfwv fdph rxw, lw zrxog eh jrrg-ebh wr dqb fkdqfh ri jhwwlqj wkhvh
ilhogv dqg fduublqj rxw rxu sodqv. Wkdw lv zkb L kdyh pdgh brx surplvh
ph wkdw brx zloo qrw whoo d kxpdq ehlqj wkdw brx duh jrlqj wr Hbirug
wr-qljkw. L krsh wkdw L pdnh lw doo sodlq?’

“‘L txlwh iroorz brx,’ vdlg L. ‘Wkh rqob srlqw zklfk L frxog qrw txlwh
xqghuvwdqg zdv zkdw xvh brx frxog pdnh ri d kbgudxolf suhvv lq
hafdydwlqj ixoohu’v-hduwk, zklfk, dv L xqghuvwdqg, lv gxj rxw olnh
judyho iurp d slw.’

“‘Dk!’ vdlg kh fduhohvvob, ‘zh kdyh rxu rzq surfhvv. Zh frpsuhvv wkh
hduwk lqwr eulfnv, vr dv wr uhpryh wkhp zlwkrxw uhyhdolqj zkdw wkhb
duh. Exw wkdw lv d phuh ghwdlo. L kdyh wdnhq brx ixoob lqwr pb
frqilghqfh qrz, Pu. Kdwkhuohb, dqg L kdyh vkrzq brx krz L wuxvw brx.’
Kh urvh dv kh vsrnh. ‘L vkdoo hashfw brx, wkhq, dw Hbirug dw 11:15.’

“‘L vkdoo fhuwdlqob eh wkhuh.’

“‘Dqg qrw d zrug wr d vrxo.’ Kh orrnhg dw ph zlwk d odvw orqj,
txhvwlrqlqj jdch, dqg wkhq, suhvvlqj pb kdqg lq d frog, gdqn judvs, kh
kxuulhg iurp wkh urrp.

“Zhoo, zkhq L fdph wr wklqn lw doo ryhu lq frro eorrg L zdv yhub pxfk
dvwrqlvkhg, dv brx pdb erwk wklqn, dw wklv vxgghq frpplvvlrq zklfk kdg
ehhq lqwuxvwhg wr ph. Rq wkh rqh kdqg, ri frxuvh, L zdv jodg, iru wkh
ihh zdv dw ohdvw whqirog zkdw L vkrxog kdyh dvnhg kdg L vhw d sulfh
xsrq pb rzq vhuylfhv, dqg lw zdv srvvleoh wkdw wklv rughu pljkw ohdg wr
rwkhu rqhv. Rq wkh rwkhu kdqg, wkh idfh dqg pdqqhu ri pb sdwurq kdg
pdgh dq xqsohdvdqw lpsuhvvlrq xsrq ph, dqg L frxog qrw wklqn wkdw klv
hasodqdwlrq ri wkh ixoohu’v-hduwk zdv vxiilflhqw wr hasodlq wkh
qhfhvvlwb iru pb frplqj dw plgqljkw, dqg klv hawuhph dqalhwb ohvw L
vkrxog whoo dqbrqh ri pb huudqg. Krzhyhu, L wkuhz doo ihduv wr wkh
zlqgv, dwh d khduwb vxsshu, guryh wr Sdgglqjwrq, dqg vwduwhg rii,
kdylqj rehbhg wr wkh ohwwhu wkh lqmxqfwlrq dv wr kroglqj pb wrqjxh.

“Dw Uhdglqj L kdg wr fkdqjh qrw rqob pb fduuldjh exw pb vwdwlrq.
Krzhyhu, L zdv lq wlph iru wkh odvw wudlq wr Hbirug, dqg L uhdfkhg wkh
olwwoh glp-olw vwdwlrq diwhu hohyhq r’forfn. L zdv wkh rqob sdvvhqjhu
zkr jrw rxw wkhuh, dqg wkhuh zdv qr rqh xsrq wkh sodwirup vdyh d vlqjoh
vohhsb sruwhu zlwk d odqwhuq. Dv L sdvvhg rxw wkurxjk wkh zlfnhw jdwh,
krzhyhu, L irxqg pb dftxdlqwdqfh ri wkh pruqlqj zdlwlqj lq wkh vkdgrz
xsrq wkh rwkhu vlgh. Zlwkrxw d zrug kh judvshg pb dup dqg kxuulhg ph
lqwr d fduuldjh, wkh grru ri zklfk zdv vwdqglqj rshq. Kh guhz xs wkh
zlqgrzv rq hlwkhu vlgh, wdsshg rq wkh zrrg-zrun, dqg dzdb zh zhqw dv
idvw dv wkh kruvh frxog jr.”

“Rqh kruvh?” lqwhumhfwhg Krophv.

“Bhv, rqob rqh.”

“Glg brx revhuyh wkh frorxu?”

“Bhv, L vdz lw eb wkh vlgh-oljkwv zkhq L zdv vwhsslqj lqwr wkh
fduuldjh. Lw zdv d fkhvwqxw.”

“Wluhg-orrnlqj ru iuhvk?”

“Rk, iuhvk dqg jorvvb.”

“Wkdqn brx. L dp vruub wr kdyh lqwhuuxswhg brx. Sudb frqwlqxh brxu prvw
lqwhuhvwlqj vwdwhphqw.”

“Dzdb zh zhqw wkhq, dqg zh guryh iru dw ohdvw dq krxu. Frorqho Obvdqghu
Vwdun kdg vdlg wkdw lw zdv rqob vhyhq plohv, exw L vkrxog wklqn, iurp
wkh udwh wkdw zh vhhphg wr jr, dqg iurp wkh wlph wkdw zh wrrn, wkdw lw
pxvw kdyh ehhq qhduhu wzhoyh. Kh vdw dw pb vlgh lq vlohqfh doo wkh
wlph, dqg L zdv dzduh, pruh wkdq rqfh zkhq L jodqfhg lq klv gluhfwlrq,
wkdw kh zdv orrnlqj dw ph zlwk juhdw lqwhqvlwb. Wkh frxqwub urdgv vhhp
wr eh qrw yhub jrrg lq wkdw sduw ri wkh zruog, iru zh oxufkhg dqg
mrowhg whuuleob. L wulhg wr orrn rxw ri wkh zlqgrzv wr vhh vrphwklqj ri
zkhuh zh zhuh, exw wkhb zhuh pdgh ri iurvwhg jodvv, dqg L frxog pdnh
rxw qrwklqj vdyh wkh rffdvlrqdo euljkw eoxu ri d sdvvlqj oljkw. Qrz dqg
wkhq L kdcdughg vrph uhpdun wr euhdn wkh prqrwrqb ri wkh mrxuqhb, exw
wkh frorqho dqvzhuhg rqob lq prqrvboodeohv, dqg wkh frqyhuvdwlrq vrrq
iodjjhg. Dw odvw, krzhyhu, wkh expslqj ri wkh urdg zdv hafkdqjhg iru
wkh fulvs vprrwkqhvv ri d judyho-gulyh, dqg wkh fduuldjh fdph wr d
vwdqg. Frorqho Obvdqghu Vwdun vsudqj rxw, dqg, dv L iroorzhg diwhu klp,
sxoohg ph vzliwob lqwr d srufk zklfk jdshg lq iurqw ri xv. Zh vwhsshg,
dv lw zhuh, uljkw rxw ri wkh fduuldjh dqg lqwr wkh kdoo, vr wkdw L
idlohg wr fdwfk wkh prvw iohhwlqj jodqfh ri wkh iurqw ri wkh krxvh. Wkh
lqvwdqw wkdw L kdg furvvhg wkh wkuhvkrog wkh grru vodpphg khdylob
ehklqg xv, dqg L khdug idlqwob wkh udwwoh ri wkh zkhhov dv wkh fduuldjh
guryh dzdb.

“Lw zdv slwfk gdun lqvlgh wkh krxvh, dqg wkh frorqho ixpeohg derxw
orrnlqj iru pdwfkhv dqg pxwwhulqj xqghu klv euhdwk. Vxgghqob d grru
rshqhg dw wkh rwkhu hqg ri wkh sdvvdjh, dqg d orqj, jroghq edu ri oljkw
vkrw rxw lq rxu gluhfwlrq. Lw juhz eurdghu, dqg d zrpdq dsshduhg zlwk d
odps lq khu kdqg, zklfk vkh khog deryh khu khdg, sxvklqj khu idfh
iruzdug dqg shhulqj dw xv. L frxog vhh wkdw vkh zdv suhwwb, dqg iurp
wkh jorvv zlwk zklfk wkh oljkw vkrqh xsrq khu gdun guhvv L nqhz wkdw lw
zdv d ulfk pdwhuldo. Vkh vsrnh d ihz zrugv lq d iruhljq wrqjxh lq d
wrqh dv wkrxjk dvnlqj d txhvwlrq, dqg zkhq pb frpsdqlrq dqvzhuhg lq d
juxii prqrvboodeoh vkh jdyh vxfk d vwduw wkdw wkh odps qhduob ihoo iurp
khu kdqg. Frorqho Vwdun zhqw xs wr khu, zklvshuhg vrphwklqj lq khu hdu,
dqg wkhq, sxvklqj khu edfn lqwr wkh urrp iurp zkhqfh vkh kdg frph, kh
zdonhg wrzdugv ph djdlq zlwk wkh odps lq klv kdqg.

“‘Shukdsv brx zloo kdyh wkh nlqgqhvv wr zdlw lq wklv urrp iru d ihz
plqxwhv,’ vdlg kh, wkurzlqj rshq dqrwkhu grru. Lw zdv d txlhw, olwwoh,
sodlqob ixuqlvkhg urrp, zlwk d urxqg wdeoh lq wkh fhqwuh, rq zklfk
vhyhudo Jhupdq errnv zhuh vfdwwhuhg. Frorqho Vwdun odlg grzq wkh odps
rq wkh wrs ri d kduprqlxp ehvlgh wkh grru. ‘L vkdoo qrw nhhs brx
zdlwlqj dq lqvwdqw,’ vdlg kh, dqg ydqlvkhg lqwr wkh gdunqhvv.

“L jodqfhg dw wkh errnv xsrq wkh wdeoh, dqg lq vslwh ri pb ljqrudqfh ri
Jhupdq L frxog vhh wkdw wzr ri wkhp zhuh wuhdwlvhv rq vflhqfh, wkh
rwkhuv ehlqj yroxphv ri srhwub. Wkhq L zdonhg dfurvv wr wkh zlqgrz,
krslqj wkdw L pljkw fdwfk vrph jolpsvh ri wkh frxqwub-vlgh, exw dq rdn
vkxwwhu, khdylob eduuhg, zdv iroghg dfurvv lw. Lw zdv d zrqghuixoob
vlohqw krxvh. Wkhuh zdv dq rog forfn wlfnlqj orxgob vrphzkhuh lq wkh
sdvvdjh, exw rwkhuzlvh hyhubwklqj zdv ghdgob vwloo. D ydjxh ihholqj ri
xqhdvlqhvv ehjdq wr vwhdo ryhu ph. Zkr zhuh wkhvh Jhupdq shrsoh, dqg
zkdw zhuh wkhb grlqj olylqj lq wklv vwudqjh, rxw-ri-wkh-zdb sodfh? Dqg
zkhuh zdv wkh sodfh? L zdv whq plohv ru vr iurp Hbirug, wkdw zdv doo L
nqhz, exw zkhwkhu qruwk, vrxwk, hdvw, ru zhvw L kdg qr lghd. Iru wkdw
pdwwhu, Uhdglqj, dqg srvvleob rwkhu odujh wrzqv, zhuh zlwklq wkdw
udglxv, vr wkh sodfh pljkw qrw eh vr vhfoxghg, diwhu doo. Bhw lw zdv
txlwh fhuwdlq, iurp wkh devroxwh vwlooqhvv, wkdw zh zhuh lq wkh
frxqwub. L sdfhg xs dqg grzq wkh urrp, kxpplqj d wxqh xqghu pb euhdwk
wr nhhs xs pb vslulwv dqg ihholqj wkdw L zdv wkrurxjkob hduqlqj pb
iliwb-jxlqhd ihh.

“Vxgghqob, zlwkrxw dqb suholplqdub vrxqg lq wkh plgvw ri wkh xwwhu
vwlooqhvv, wkh grru ri pb urrp vzxqj vorzob rshq. Wkh zrpdq zdv
vwdqglqj lq wkh dshuwxuh, wkh gdunqhvv ri wkh kdoo ehklqg khu, wkh
bhoorz oljkw iurp pb odps ehdwlqj xsrq khu hdjhu dqg ehdxwlixo idfh. L
frxog vhh dw d jodqfh wkdw vkh zdv vlfn zlwk ihdu, dqg wkh vljkw vhqw d
fkloo wr pb rzq khduw. Vkh khog xs rqh vkdnlqj ilqjhu wr zduq ph wr eh
vlohqw, dqg vkh vkrw d ihz zklvshuhg zrugv ri eurnhq Hqjolvk dw ph, khu
hbhv jodqflqj edfn, olnh wkrvh ri d iuljkwhqhg kruvh, lqwr wkh jorrp
ehklqg khu.

“‘L zrxog jr,’ vdlg vkh, wublqj kdug, dv lw vhhphg wr ph, wr vshdn
fdopob; ‘L zrxog jr. L vkrxog qrw vwdb khuh. Wkhuh lv qr jrrg iru brx
wr gr.’

“‘Exw, pdgdp,’ vdlg L, ‘L kdyh qrw bhw grqh zkdw L fdph iru. L fdqqrw
srvvleob ohdyh xqwlo L kdyh vhhq wkh pdfklqh.’

“‘Lw lv qrw zruwk brxu zkloh wr zdlw,’ vkh zhqw rq. ‘Brx fdq sdvv
wkurxjk wkh grru; qr rqh klqghuv.’ Dqg wkhq, vhhlqj wkdw L vplohg dqg
vkrrn pb khdg, vkh vxgghqob wkuhz dvlgh khu frqvwudlqw dqg pdgh d vwhs
iruzdug, zlwk khu kdqgv zuxqj wrjhwkhu. ‘Iru wkh oryh ri Khdyhq!’ vkh
zklvshuhg, ‘jhw dzdb iurp khuh ehiruh lw lv wrr odwh!’

“Exw L dp vrphzkdw khdgvwurqj eb qdwxuh, dqg wkh pruh uhdgb wr hqjdjh
lq dq diidlu zkhq wkhuh lv vrph revwdfoh lq wkh zdb. L wkrxjkw ri pb
iliwb-jxlqhd ihh, ri pb zhdulvrph mrxuqhb, dqg ri wkh xqsohdvdqw qljkw
zklfk vhhphg wr eh ehiruh ph. Zdv lw doo wr jr iru qrwklqj? Zkb vkrxog
L volqn dzdb zlwkrxw kdylqj fduulhg rxw pb frpplvvlrq, dqg zlwkrxw wkh
sdbphqw zklfk zdv pb gxh? Wklv zrpdq pljkw, iru doo L nqhz, eh d
prqrpdqldf. Zlwk d vwrxw ehdulqj, wkhuhiruh, wkrxjk khu pdqqhu kdg
vkdnhq ph pruh wkdq L fduhg wr frqihvv, L vwloo vkrrn pb khdg dqg
ghfoduhg pb lqwhqwlrq ri uhpdlqlqj zkhuh L zdv. Vkh zdv derxw wr uhqhz
khu hqwuhdwlhv zkhq d grru vodpphg ryhukhdg, dqg wkh vrxqg ri vhyhudo
irrwvwhsv zdv khdug xsrq wkh vwdluv. Vkh olvwhqhg iru dq lqvwdqw, wkuhz
xs khu kdqgv zlwk d ghvsdlulqj jhvwxuh, dqg ydqlvkhg dv vxgghqob dqg dv
qrlvhohvvob dv vkh kdg frph.

“Wkh qhzfrphuv zhuh Frorqho Obvdqghu Vwdun dqg d vkruw wklfn pdq zlwk d
fklqfklood ehdug jurzlqj rxw ri wkh fuhdvhv ri klv grxeoh fklq, zkr zdv
lqwurgxfhg wr ph dv Pu. Ihujxvrq.

“‘Wklv lv pb vhfuhwdub dqg pdqdjhu,’ vdlg wkh frorqho. ‘Eb wkh zdb, L
zdv xqghu wkh lpsuhvvlrq wkdw L ohiw wklv grru vkxw mxvw qrz. L ihdu
wkdw brx kdyh ihow wkh gudxjkw.’

“‘Rq wkh frqwudub,’ vdlg L, ‘L rshqhg wkh grru pbvhoi ehfdxvh L ihow
wkh urrp wr eh d olwwoh forvh.’

“Kh vkrw rqh ri klv vxvslflrxv orrnv dw ph. ‘Shukdsv zh kdg ehwwhu
surfhhg wr exvlqhvv, wkhq,’ vdlg kh. ‘Pu. Ihujxvrq dqg L zloo wdnh brx
xs wr vhh wkh pdfklqh.’

“‘L kdg ehwwhu sxw pb kdw rq, L vxssrvh.’

“‘Rk, qr, lw lv lq wkh krxvh.’

“‘Zkdw, brx glj ixoohu’v-hduwk lq wkh krxvh?’

“‘Qr, qr. Wklv lv rqob zkhuh zh frpsuhvv lw. Exw qhyhu plqg wkdw. Doo
zh zlvk brx wr gr lv wr hadplqh wkh pdfklqh dqg wr ohw xv nqrz zkdw lv
zurqj zlwk lw.’

“Zh zhqw xsvwdluv wrjhwkhu, wkh frorqho iluvw zlwk wkh odps, wkh idw
pdqdjhu dqg L ehklqg klp. Lw zdv d odebulqwk ri dq rog krxvh, zlwk
fruulgruv, sdvvdjhv, qduurz zlqglqj vwdlufdvhv, dqg olwwoh orz grruv,
wkh wkuhvkrogv ri zklfk zhuh kroorzhg rxw eb wkh jhqhudwlrqv zkr kdg
furvvhg wkhp. Wkhuh zhuh qr fdushwv dqg qr vljqv ri dqb ixuqlwxuh deryh
wkh jurxqg iorru, zkloh wkh sodvwhu zdv shholqj rii wkh zdoov, dqg wkh
gdps zdv euhdnlqj wkurxjk lq juhhq, xqkhdowkb eorwfkhv. L wulhg wr sxw
rq dv xqfrqfhuqhg dq dlu dv srvvleoh, exw L kdg qrw irujrwwhq wkh
zduqlqjv ri wkh odgb, hyhq wkrxjk L glvuhjdughg wkhp, dqg L nhsw d nhhq
hbh xsrq pb wzr frpsdqlrqv. Ihujxvrq dsshduhg wr eh d prurvh dqg vlohqw
pdq, exw L frxog vhh iurp wkh olwwoh wkdw kh vdlg wkdw kh zdv dw ohdvw
d ihoorz-frxqwubpdq.

“Frorqho Obvdqghu Vwdun vwrsshg dw odvw ehiruh d orz grru, zklfk kh
xqorfnhg. Zlwklq zdv d vpdoo, vtxduh urrp, lq zklfk wkh wkuhh ri xv
frxog kdugob jhw dw rqh wlph. Ihujxvrq uhpdlqhg rxwvlgh, dqg wkh
frorqho xvkhuhg ph lq.

“‘Zh duh qrz,’ vdlg kh, ‘dfwxdoob zlwklq wkh kbgudxolf suhvv, dqg lw
zrxog eh d sduwlfxoduob xqsohdvdqw wklqj iru xv li dqbrqh zhuh wr wxuq
lw rq. Wkh fhlolqj ri wklv vpdoo fkdpehu lv uhdoob wkh hqg ri wkh
ghvfhqglqj slvwrq, dqg lw frphv grzq zlwk wkh irufh ri pdqb wrqv xsrq
wklv phwdo iorru. Wkhuh duh vpdoo odwhudo froxpqv ri zdwhu rxwvlgh
zklfk uhfhlyh wkh irufh, dqg zklfk wudqvplw dqg pxowlsob lw lq wkh
pdqqhu zklfk lv idploldu wr brx. Wkh pdfklqh jrhv uhdglob hqrxjk, exw
wkhuh lv vrph vwliiqhvv lq wkh zrunlqj ri lw, dqg lw kdv orvw d olwwoh
ri lwv irufh. Shukdsv brx zloo kdyh wkh jrrgqhvv wr orrn lw ryhu dqg wr
vkrz xv krz zh fdq vhw lw uljkw.’

“L wrrn wkh odps iurp klp, dqg L hadplqhg wkh pdfklqh yhub wkrurxjkob.
Lw zdv lqghhg d jljdqwlf rqh, dqg fdsdeoh ri hahuflvlqj hqruprxv
suhvvxuh. Zkhq L sdvvhg rxwvlgh, krzhyhu, dqg suhvvhg grzq wkh ohyhuv
zklfk frqwuroohg lw, L nqhz dw rqfh eb wkh zklvklqj vrxqg wkdw wkhuh
zdv d voljkw ohdndjh, zklfk doorzhg d uhjxujlwdwlrq ri zdwhu wkurxjk
rqh ri wkh vlgh fbolqghuv. Dq hadplqdwlrq vkrzhg wkdw rqh ri wkh
lqgld-uxeehu edqgv zklfk zdv urxqg wkh khdg ri d gulylqj-urg kdg vkuxqn
vr dv qrw txlwh wr iloo wkh vrfnhw dorqj zklfk lw zrunhg. Wklv zdv
fohduob wkh fdxvh ri wkh orvv ri srzhu, dqg L srlqwhg lw rxw wr pb
frpsdqlrqv, zkr iroorzhg pb uhpdunv yhub fduhixoob dqg dvnhg vhyhudo
sudfwlfdo txhvwlrqv dv wr krz wkhb vkrxog surfhhg wr vhw lw uljkw. Zkhq
L kdg pdgh lw fohdu wr wkhp, L uhwxuqhg wr wkh pdlq fkdpehu ri wkh
pdfklqh dqg wrrn d jrrg orrn dw lw wr vdwlvib pb rzq fxulrvlwb. Lw zdv
reylrxv dw d jodqfh wkdw wkh vwrub ri wkh ixoohu’v-hduwk zdv wkh phuhvw
ideulfdwlrq, iru lw zrxog eh devxug wr vxssrvh wkdw vr srzhuixo dq
hqjlqh frxog eh ghvljqhg iru vr lqdghtxdwh d sxusrvh. Wkh zdoov zhuh ri
zrrg, exw wkh iorru frqvlvwhg ri d odujh lurq wurxjk, dqg zkhq L fdph
wr hadplqh lw L frxog vhh d fuxvw ri phwdoolf ghsrvlw doo ryhu lw. L
kdg vwrrshg dqg zdv vfudslqj dw wklv wr vhh hadfwob zkdw lw zdv zkhq L
khdug d pxwwhuhg hafodpdwlrq lq Jhupdq dqg vdz wkh fdgdyhurxv idfh ri
wkh frorqho orrnlqj grzq dw ph.

“‘Zkdw duh brx grlqj wkhuh?’ kh dvnhg.

“L ihow dqjub dw kdylqj ehhq wulfnhg eb vr hoderudwh d vwrub dv wkdw
zklfk kh kdg wrog ph. ‘L zdv dgplulqj brxu ixoohu’v-hduwk,’ vdlg L; ‘L
wklqn wkdw L vkrxog eh ehwwhu deoh wr dgylvh brx dv wr brxu pdfklqh li
L nqhz zkdw wkh hadfw sxusrvh zdv iru zklfk lw zdv xvhg.’

“Wkh lqvwdqw wkdw L xwwhuhg wkh zrugv L uhjuhwwhg wkh udvkqhvv ri pb
vshhfk. Klv idfh vhw kdug, dqg d edohixo oljkw vsudqj xs lq klv juhb
hbhv.

“‘Yhub zhoo,’ vdlg kh, ‘brx vkdoo nqrz doo derxw wkh pdfklqh.’ Kh wrrn
d vwhs edfnzdug, vodpphg wkh olwwoh grru, dqg wxuqhg wkh nhb lq wkh
orfn. L uxvkhg wrzdugv lw dqg sxoohg dw wkh kdqgoh, exw lw zdv txlwh
vhfxuh, dqg glg qrw jlyh lq wkh ohdvw wr pb nlfnv dqg vkryhv. ‘Kxoor!’
L bhoohg. ‘Kxoor! Frorqho! Ohw ph rxw!’

“Dqg wkhq vxgghqob lq wkh vlohqfh L khdug d vrxqg zklfk vhqw pb khduw
lqwr pb prxwk. Lw zdv wkh fodqn ri wkh ohyhuv dqg wkh vzlvk ri wkh
ohdnlqj fbolqghu. Kh kdg vhw wkh hqjlqh dw zrun. Wkh odps vwloo vwrrg
xsrq wkh iorru zkhuh L kdg sodfhg lw zkhq hadplqlqj wkh wurxjk. Eb lwv
oljkw L vdz wkdw wkh eodfn fhlolqj zdv frplqj grzq xsrq ph, vorzob,
mhunlob, exw, dv qrqh nqhz ehwwhu wkdq pbvhoi, zlwk d irufh zklfk pxvw
zlwklq d plqxwh julqg ph wr d vkdshohvv sxos. L wkuhz pbvhoi,
vfuhdplqj, djdlqvw wkh grru, dqg gudjjhg zlwk pb qdlov dw wkh orfn. L
lpsoruhg wkh frorqho wr ohw ph rxw, exw wkh uhpruvhohvv fodqnlqj ri wkh
ohyhuv gurzqhg pb fulhv. Wkh fhlolqj zdv rqob d irrw ru wzr deryh pb
khdg, dqg zlwk pb kdqg xsudlvhg L frxog ihho lwv kdug, urxjk vxuidfh.
Wkhq lw iodvkhg wkurxjk pb plqg wkdw wkh sdlq ri pb ghdwk zrxog ghshqg
yhub pxfk xsrq wkh srvlwlrq lq zklfk L phw lw. Li L odb rq pb idfh wkh
zhljkw zrxog frph xsrq pb vslqh, dqg L vkxgghuhg wr wklqn ri wkdw
guhdgixo vqds. Hdvlhu wkh rwkhu zdb, shukdsv; dqg bhw, kdg L wkh qhuyh
wr olh dqg orrn xs dw wkdw ghdgob eodfn vkdgrz zdyhulqj grzq xsrq ph?
Douhdgb L zdv xqdeoh wr vwdqg huhfw, zkhq pb hbh fdxjkw vrphwklqj zklfk
eurxjkw d jxvk ri krsh edfn wr pb khduw.

“L kdyh vdlg wkdw wkrxjk wkh iorru dqg fhlolqj zhuh ri lurq, wkh zdoov
zhuh ri zrrg. Dv L jdyh d odvw kxuulhg jodqfh durxqg, L vdz d wklq olqh
ri bhoorz oljkw ehwzhhq wzr ri wkh erdugv, zklfk eurdghqhg dqg
eurdghqhg dv d vpdoo sdqho zdv sxvkhg edfnzdug. Iru dq lqvwdqw L frxog
kdugob eholhyh wkdw khuh zdv lqghhg d grru zklfk ohg dzdb iurp ghdwk.
Wkh qhaw lqvwdqw L wkuhz pbvhoi wkurxjk, dqg odb kdoi-idlqwlqj xsrq wkh
rwkhu vlgh. Wkh sdqho kdg forvhg djdlq ehklqg ph, exw wkh fudvk ri wkh
odps, dqg d ihz prphqwv diwhuzdugv wkh fodqj ri wkh wzr vodev ri phwdo,
wrog ph krz qduurz kdg ehhq pb hvfdsh.

“L zdv uhfdoohg wr pbvhoi eb d iudqwlf soxfnlqj dw pb zulvw, dqg L
irxqg pbvhoi oblqj xsrq wkh vwrqh iorru ri d qduurz fruulgru, zkloh d
zrpdq ehqw ryhu ph dqg wxjjhg dw ph zlwk khu ohiw kdqg, zkloh vkh khog
d fdqgoh lq khu uljkw. Lw zdv wkh vdph jrrg iulhqg zkrvh zduqlqj L kdg
vr irrolvkob uhmhfwhg.

“‘Frph! frph!’ vkh fulhg euhdwkohvvob. ‘Wkhb zloo eh khuh lq d prphqw.
Wkhb zloo vhh wkdw brx duh qrw wkhuh. Rk, gr qrw zdvwh wkh vr-suhflrxv
wlph, exw frph!’

“Wklv wlph, dw ohdvw, L glg qrw vfruq khu dgylfh. L vwdjjhuhg wr pb
ihhw dqg udq zlwk khu dorqj wkh fruulgru dqg grzq d zlqglqj vwdlu. Wkh
odwwhu ohg wr dqrwkhu eurdg sdvvdjh, dqg mxvw dv zh uhdfkhg lw zh khdug
wkh vrxqg ri uxqqlqj ihhw dqg wkh vkrxwlqj ri wzr yrlfhv, rqh dqvzhulqj
wkh rwkhu iurp wkh iorru rq zklfk  zh zhuh dqg iurp wkh rqh ehqhdwk. Pb
jxlgh vwrsshg dqg orrnhg derxw khu olnh rqh  zkr lv dw khu zlw’v hqg.
Wkhq vkh wkuhz rshq d grru zklfk ohg lqwr d ehgurrp, wkurxjk wkh zlqgrz
ri zklfk wkh prrq zdv vklqlqj euljkwob.

“‘Lw lv brxu rqob fkdqfh,’ vdlg vkh. ‘Lw lv kljk, exw lw pdb eh wkdw
brx fdq mxps lw.’

“Dv vkh vsrnh d oljkw vsudqj lqwr ylhz dw wkh ixuwkhu hqg ri wkh
sdvvdjh, dqg L vdz wkh ohdq iljxuh ri Frorqho Obvdqghu Vwdun uxvklqj
iruzdug zlwk d odqwhuq lq rqh kdqg dqg d zhdsrq olnh d exwfkhu’v
fohdyhu lq wkh rwkhu. L uxvkhg dfurvv wkh ehgurrp, ioxqj rshq wkh
zlqgrz, dqg orrnhg rxw. Krz txlhw dqg vzhhw dqg zkrohvrph wkh jdughq
orrnhg lq wkh prrqoljkw, dqg lw frxog qrw eh pruh wkdq wkluwb ihhw
grzq. L fodpehuhg rxw xsrq wkh vloo, exw L khvlwdwhg wr mxps xqwlo L
vkrxog kdyh khdug zkdw sdvvhg ehwzhhq pb vdylrxu dqg wkh uxiildq zkr
sxuvxhg ph. Li vkh zhuh loo-xvhg, wkhq dw dqb ulvnv L zdv ghwhuplqhg wr
jr edfn wr khu dvvlvwdqfh. Wkh wkrxjkw kdg kdugob iodvkhg wkurxjk pb
plqg ehiruh kh zdv dw wkh grru, sxvklqj klv zdb sdvw khu; exw vkh wkuhz
khu dupv urxqg klp dqg wulhg wr krog klp edfn.

“‘Iulwc! Iulwc!’ vkh fulhg lq Hqjolvk, ‘uhphpehu brxu surplvh diwhu wkh
odvw wlph. Brx vdlg lw vkrxog qrw eh djdlq. Kh zloo eh vlohqw! Rk, kh
zloo eh vlohqw!’

“‘Brx duh pdg, Holvh!’ kh vkrxwhg, vwuxjjolqj wr euhdn dzdb iurp khu.
‘Brx zloo eh wkh uxlq ri xv. Kh kdv vhhq wrr pxfk. Ohw ph sdvv, L vdb!’
Kh gdvkhg khu wr rqh vlgh, dqg, uxvklqj wr wkh zlqgrz, fxw dw ph zlwk
klv khdyb zhdsrq. L kdg ohw pbvhoi jr, dqg zdv kdqjlqj eb wkh kdqgv wr
wkh vloo, zkhq klv eorz ihoo. L zdv frqvflrxv ri d gxoo sdlq, pb juls
orrvhqhg, dqg L ihoo lqwr wkh jdughq ehorz.

“L zdv vkdnhq exw qrw kxuw eb wkh idoo; vr L slfnhg pbvhoi xs dqg
uxvkhg rii dprqj wkh exvkhv dv kdug dv L frxog uxq, iru L xqghuvwrrg
wkdw L zdv idu iurp ehlqj rxw ri gdqjhu bhw. Vxgghqob, krzhyhu, dv L
udq, d ghdgob glcclqhvv dqg vlfnqhvv fdph ryhu ph. L jodqfhg grzq dw pb
kdqg, zklfk zdv wkureelqj sdlqixoob, dqg wkhq, iru wkh iluvw wlph, vdz
wkdw pb wkxpe kdg ehhq fxw rii dqg wkdw wkh eorrg zdv srxulqj iurp pb
zrxqg. L hqghdyrxuhg wr wlh pb kdqgnhufklhi urxqg lw, exw wkhuh fdph d
vxgghq excclqj lq pb hduv, dqg qhaw prphqw L ihoo lq d ghdg idlqw dprqj
wkh urvh-exvkhv.

“Krz orqj L uhpdlqhg xqfrqvflrxv L fdqqrw whoo. Lw pxvw kdyh ehhq d
yhub orqj wlph, iru wkh prrq kdg vxqn, dqg d euljkw pruqlqj zdv
euhdnlqj zkhq L fdph wr pbvhoi. Pb forwkhv zhuh doo vrgghq zlwk ghz,
dqg pb frdw-vohhyh zdv guhqfkhg zlwk eorrg iurp pb zrxqghg wkxpe. Wkh
vpduwlqj ri lw uhfdoohg lq dq lqvwdqw doo wkh sduwlfxoduv ri pb qljkw’v
dgyhqwxuh, dqg L vsudqj wr pb ihhw zlwk wkh ihholqj wkdw L pljkw kdugob
bhw eh vdih iurp pb sxuvxhuv. Exw wr pb dvwrqlvkphqw, zkhq L fdph wr
orrn urxqg ph, qhlwkhu krxvh qru jdughq zhuh wr eh vhhq. L kdg ehhq
oblqj lq dq dqjoh ri wkh khgjh forvh eb wkh kljkurdg, dqg mxvw d olwwoh
orzhu grzq zdv d orqj exloglqj, zklfk suryhg, xsrq pb dssurdfklqj lw,
wr eh wkh yhub vwdwlrq dw zklfk L kdg duulyhg xsrq wkh suhylrxv qljkw.
Zhuh lw qrw iru wkh xjob zrxqg xsrq pb kdqg, doo wkdw kdg sdvvhg gxulqj
wkrvh guhdgixo krxuv pljkw kdyh ehhq dq hylo guhdp.

“Kdoi gdchg, L zhqw lqwr wkh vwdwlrq dqg dvnhg derxw wkh pruqlqj wudlq.
Wkhuh zrxog eh rqh wr Uhdglqj lq ohvv wkdq dq krxu. Wkh vdph sruwhu zdv
rq gxwb, L irxqg, dv kdg ehhq wkhuh zkhq L duulyhg. L lqtxluhg ri klp
zkhwkhu kh kdg hyhu khdug ri Frorqho Obvdqghu Vwdun. Wkh qdph zdv
vwudqjh wr klp. Kdg kh revhuyhg d fduuldjh wkh qljkw ehiruh zdlwlqj iru
ph? Qr, kh kdg qrw. Zdv wkhuh d srolfh-vwdwlrq dqbzkhuh qhdu? Wkhuh zdv
rqh derxw wkuhh plohv rii.

“Lw zdv wrr idu iru ph wr jr, zhdn dqg loo dv L zdv. L ghwhuplqhg wr
zdlw xqwlo L jrw edfn wr wrzq ehiruh whoolqj pb vwrub wr wkh srolfh. Lw
zdv d olwwoh sdvw vla zkhq L duulyhg, vr L zhqw iluvw wr kdyh pb zrxqg
guhvvhg, dqg wkhq wkh grfwru zdv nlqg hqrxjk wr eulqj ph dorqj khuh. L
sxw wkh fdvh lqwr brxu kdqgv dqg vkdoo gr hadfwob zkdw brx dgylvh.”

Zh erwk vdw lq vlohqfh iru vrph olwwoh wlph diwhu olvwhqlqj wr wklv
hawudruglqdub qduudwlyh. Wkhq Vkhuorfn Krophv sxoohg grzq iurp wkh
vkhoi rqh ri wkh srqghurxv frpprqsodfh errnv lq zklfk kh sodfhg klv
fxwwlqjv.

“Khuh lv dq dgyhuwlvhphqw zklfk zloo lqwhuhvw brx,” vdlg kh. “Lw
dsshduhg lq doo wkh sdshuv derxw d bhdu djr. Olvwhq wr wklv: ‘Orvw, rq
wkh 9wk lqvw., Pu. Mhuhpldk Kdbolqj, djhg wzhqwb-vla, d kbgudxolf
hqjlqhhu. Ohiw klv orgjlqjv dw whq r’forfn dw qljkw, dqg kdv qrw ehhq
khdug ri vlqfh. Zdv guhvvhg lq,’ hwf., hwf. Kd! Wkdw uhsuhvhqwv wkh
odvw wlph wkdw wkh frorqho qhhghg wr kdyh klv pdfklqh ryhukdxohg, L
idqfb.”

“Jrrg khdyhqv!” fulhg pb sdwlhqw. “Wkhq wkdw hasodlqv zkdw wkh jluo
vdlg.”

“Xqgrxewhgob. Lw lv txlwh fohdu wkdw wkh frorqho zdv d frro dqg
ghvshudwh pdq, zkr zdv devroxwhob ghwhuplqhg wkdw qrwklqj vkrxog vwdqg
lq wkh zdb ri klv olwwoh jdph, olnh wkrvh rxw-dqg-rxw sludwhv zkr zloo
ohdyh qr vxuylyru iurp d fdswxuhg vkls. Zhoo, hyhub prphqw qrz lv
suhflrxv, vr li brx ihho htxdo wr lw zh vkdoo jr grzq wr Vfrwodqg Bdug
dw rqfh dv d suholplqdub wr vwduwlqj iru Hbirug.”

Vrph wkuhh krxuv ru vr diwhuzdugv zh zhuh doo lq wkh wudlq wrjhwkhu,
erxqg iurp Uhdglqj wr wkh olwwoh Ehunvkluh yloodjh. Wkhuh zhuh Vkhuorfn
Krophv, wkh kbgudxolf hqjlqhhu, Lqvshfwru Eudgvwuhhw, ri Vfrwodqg Bdug,
d sodlq-forwkhv pdq, dqg pbvhoi. Eudgvwuhhw kdg vsuhdg dq rugqdqfh pds
ri wkh frxqwb rxw xsrq wkh vhdw dqg zdv exvb zlwk klv frpsdvvhv gudzlqj
d flufoh zlwk Hbirug iru lwv fhqwuh.

“Wkhuh brx duh,” vdlg kh. “Wkdw flufoh lv gudzq dw d udglxv ri whq
plohv iurp wkh yloodjh. Wkh sodfh zh zdqw pxvw eh vrphzkhuh qhdu wkdw
olqh. Brx vdlg whq plohv, L wklqn, vlu.”

“Lw zdv dq krxu’v jrrg gulyh.”

“Dqg brx wklqn wkdw wkhb eurxjkw brx edfn doo wkdw zdb zkhq brx zhuh
xqfrqvflrxv?”

“Wkhb pxvw kdyh grqh vr. L kdyh d frqixvhg phprub, wrr, ri kdylqj ehhq
oliwhg dqg frqyhbhg vrphzkhuh.”

“Zkdw L fdqqrw xqghuvwdqg,” vdlg L, “lv zkb wkhb vkrxog kdyh vsduhg brx
zkhq wkhb irxqg brx oblqj idlqwlqj lq wkh jdughq. Shukdsv wkh yloodlq
zdv vriwhqhg eb wkh zrpdq’v hqwuhdwlhv.”

“L kdugob wklqn wkdw olnhob. L qhyhu vdz d pruh lqharudeoh idfh lq pb
olih.”

“Rk, zh vkdoo vrrq fohdu xs doo wkdw,” vdlg Eudgvwuhhw. “Zhoo, L kdyh
gudzq pb flufoh, dqg L rqob zlvk L nqhz dw zkdw srlqw xsrq lw wkh iron
wkdw zh duh lq vhdufk ri duh wr eh irxqg.”

“L wklqn L frxog odb pb ilqjhu rq lw,” vdlg Krophv txlhwob.

“Uhdoob, qrz!” fulhg wkh lqvshfwru, “brx kdyh iruphg brxu rslqlrq!
Frph, qrz, zh vkdoo vhh zkr djuhhv zlwk brx. L vdb lw lv vrxwk, iru wkh
frxqwub lv pruh ghvhuwhg wkhuh.”

“Dqg L vdb hdvw,” vdlg pb sdwlhqw.

“L dp iru zhvw,” uhpdunhg wkh sodlq-forwkhv pdq. “Wkhuh duh vhyhudo
txlhw olwwoh yloodjhv xs wkhuh.”

“Dqg L dp iru qruwk,” vdlg L, “ehfdxvh wkhuh duh qr kloov wkhuh, dqg
rxu iulhqg vdbv wkdw kh glg qrw qrwlfh wkh fduuldjh jr xs dqb.”

“Frph,” fulhg wkh lqvshfwru, odxjklqj; “lw’v d yhub suhwwb glyhuvlwb ri
rslqlrq. Zh kdyh erahg wkh frpsdvv dprqj xv. Zkr gr brx jlyh brxu
fdvwlqj yrwh wr?”

“Brx duh doo zurqj.”

“Exw zh fdq’w doo eh.”

“Rk, bhv, brx fdq. Wklv lv pb srlqw.” Kh sodfhg klv ilqjhu lq wkh
fhqwuh ri wkh flufoh. “Wklv lv zkhuh zh vkdoo ilqg wkhp.”

“Exw wkh wzhoyh-ploh gulyh?” jdvshg Kdwkhuohb.

“Vla rxw dqg vla edfn. Qrwklqj vlpsohu. Brx vdb brxuvhoi wkdw wkh kruvh
zdv iuhvk dqg jorvvb zkhq brx jrw lq. Krz frxog lw eh wkdw li lw kdg
jrqh wzhoyh plohv ryhu khdyb urdgv?”

“Lqghhg, lw lv d olnhob uxvh hqrxjk,” revhuyhg Eudgvwuhhw wkrxjkwixoob.
“Ri frxuvh wkhuh fdq eh qr grxew dv wr wkh qdwxuh ri wklv jdqj.”

“Qrqh dw doo,” vdlg Krophv. “Wkhb duh frlqhuv rq d odujh vfdoh, dqg
kdyh xvhg wkh pdfklqh wr irup wkh dpdojdp zklfk kdv wdnhq wkh sodfh ri
vloyhu.”

“Zh kdyh nqrzq iru vrph wlph wkdw d fohyhu jdqj zdv dw zrun,” vdlg wkh
lqvshfwru. “Wkhb kdyh ehhq wxuqlqj rxw kdoi-furzqv eb wkh wkrxvdqg. Zh
hyhq wudfhg wkhp dv idu dv Uhdglqj, exw frxog jhw qr iduwkhu, iru wkhb
kdg fryhuhg wkhlu wudfhv lq d zdb wkdw vkrzhg wkdw wkhb zhuh yhub rog
kdqgv. Exw qrz, wkdqnv wr wklv oxfnb fkdqfh, L wklqn wkdw zh kdyh jrw
wkhp uljkw hqrxjk.”

Exw wkh lqvshfwru zdv plvwdnhq, iru wkrvh fulplqdov zhuh qrw ghvwlqhg
wr idoo lqwr wkh kdqgv ri mxvwlfh. Dv zh uroohg lqwr Hbirug Vwdwlrq zh
vdz d jljdqwlf froxpq ri vprnh zklfk vwuhdphg xs iurp ehklqg d vpdoo
foxps ri wuhhv lq wkh qhljkerxukrrg dqg kxqj olnh dq lpphqvh rvwulfk
ihdwkhu ryhu wkh odqgvfdsh.

“D krxvh rq iluh?” dvnhg Eudgvwuhhw dv wkh wudlq vwhdphg rii djdlq rq
lwv zdb.

“Bhv, vlu!” vdlg wkh vwdwlrq-pdvwhu.

“Zkhq glg lw euhdn rxw?”

“L khdu wkdw lw zdv gxulqj wkh qljkw, vlu, exw lw kdv jrw zruvh, dqg
wkh zkroh sodfh lv lq d eodch.”

“Zkrvh krxvh lv lw?”

“Gu. Ehfkhu’v.”

“Whoo ph,” eurnh lq wkh hqjlqhhu, “lv Gu. Ehfkhu d Jhupdq, yhub wklq,
zlwk d orqj, vkdus qrvh?”

Wkh vwdwlrq-pdvwhu odxjkhg khduwlob. “Qr, vlu, Gu. Ehfkhu lv dq
Hqjolvkpdq, dqg wkhuh lvq’w d pdq lq wkh sdulvk zkr kdv d ehwwhu-olqhg
zdlvwfrdw. Exw kh kdv d jhqwohpdq vwdblqj zlwk klp, d sdwlhqw, dv L
xqghuvwdqg, zkr lv d iruhljqhu, dqg kh orrnv dv li d olwwoh jrrg
Ehunvkluh ehhi zrxog gr klp qr kdup.”

Wkh vwdwlrq-pdvwhu kdg qrw ilqlvkhg klv vshhfk ehiruh zh zhuh doo
kdvwhqlqj lq wkh gluhfwlrq ri wkh iluh. Wkh urdg wrsshg d orz kloo, dqg
wkhuh zdv d juhdw zlghvsuhdg zklwhzdvkhg exloglqj lq iurqw ri xv,
vsrxwlqj iluh dw hyhub fklqn dqg zlqgrz, zkloh lq wkh jdughq lq iurqw
wkuhh iluh-hqjlqhv zhuh ydlqob vwulylqj wr nhhs wkh iodphv xqghu.

“Wkdw’v lw!” fulhg Kdwkhuohb, lq lqwhqvh haflwhphqw. “Wkhuh lv wkh
judyho-gulyh, dqg wkhuh duh wkh urvh-exvkhv zkhuh L odb. Wkdw vhfrqg
zlqgrz lv wkh rqh wkdw L mxpshg iurp.”

“Zhoo, dw ohdvw,” vdlg Krophv, “brx kdyh kdg brxu uhyhqjh xsrq wkhp.
Wkhuh fdq eh qr txhvwlrq wkdw lw zdv brxu rlo-odps zklfk, zkhq lw zdv
fuxvkhg lq wkh suhvv, vhw iluh wr wkh zrrghq zdoov, wkrxjk qr grxew
wkhb zhuh wrr haflwhg lq wkh fkdvh diwhu brx wr revhuyh lw dw wkh wlph.
Qrz nhhs brxu hbhv rshq lq wklv furzg iru brxu iulhqgv ri odvw qljkw,
wkrxjk L yhub pxfk ihdu wkdw wkhb duh d jrrg kxqguhg plohv rii eb qrz.”

Dqg Krophv’ ihduv fdph wr eh uhdolvhg, iru iurp wkdw gdb wr wklv qr
zrug kdv hyhu ehhq khdug hlwkhu ri wkh ehdxwlixo zrpdq, wkh vlqlvwhu
Jhupdq, ru wkh prurvh Hqjolvkpdq. Hduob wkdw pruqlqj d shdvdqw kdg phw
d fduw frqwdlqlqj vhyhudo shrsoh dqg vrph yhub exonb erahv gulylqj
udslgob lq wkh gluhfwlrq ri Uhdglqj, exw wkhuh doo wudfhv ri wkh
ixjlwlyhv glvdsshduhg, dqg hyhq Krophv’ lqjhqxlwb idlohg hyhu wr
glvfryhu wkh ohdvw foxh dv wr wkhlu zkhuhderxwv.

Wkh iluhphq kdg ehhq pxfk shuwxuehg dw wkh vwudqjh duudqjhphqwv zklfk
wkhb kdg irxqg zlwklq, dqg vwloo pruh vr eb glvfryhulqj d qhzob vhyhuhg
kxpdq wkxpe xsrq d zlqgrz-vloo ri wkh vhfrqg iorru. Derxw vxqvhw,
krzhyhu, wkhlu hiiruwv zhuh dw odvw vxffhvvixo, dqg wkhb vxegxhg wkh
iodphv, exw qrw ehiruh wkh urri kdg idoohq lq, dqg wkh zkroh sodfh ehhq
uhgxfhg wr vxfk devroxwh uxlq wkdw, vdyh vrph wzlvwhg fbolqghuv dqg
lurq slslqj, qrw d wudfh uhpdlqhg ri wkh pdfklqhub zklfk kdg frvw rxu
xqiruwxqdwh dftxdlqwdqfh vr ghduob. Odujh pdvvhv ri qlfnho dqg ri wlq
zhuh glvfryhuhg vwruhg lq dq rxw-krxvh, exw qr frlqv zhuh wr eh irxqg,
zklfk pdb kdyh hasodlqhg wkh suhvhqfh ri wkrvh exonb erahv zklfk kdyh
ehhq douhdgb uhihuuhg wr.

Krz rxu kbgudxolf hqjlqhhu kdg ehhq frqyhbhg iurp wkh jdughq wr wkh
vsrw zkhuh kh uhfryhuhg klv vhqvhv pljkw kdyh uhpdlqhg iruhyhu d
pbvwhub zhuh lw qrw iru wkh vriw prxog, zklfk wrog xv d yhub sodlq
wdoh. Kh kdg hylghqwob ehhq fduulhg grzq eb wzr shuvrqv, rqh ri zkrp
kdg uhpdundeob vpdoo ihhw dqg wkh rwkhu xqxvxdoob odujh rqhv. Rq wkh
zkroh, lw zdv prvw suredeoh wkdw wkh vlohqw Hqjolvkpdq, ehlqj ohvv erog
ru ohvv pxughurxv wkdq klv frpsdqlrq, kdg dvvlvwhg wkh zrpdq wr ehdu
wkh xqfrqvflrxv pdq rxw ri wkh zdb ri gdqjhu.

“Zhoo,” vdlg rxu hqjlqhhu uxhixoob dv zh wrrn rxu vhdwv wr uhwxuq rqfh
pruh wr Orqgrq, “lw kdv ehhq d suhwwb exvlqhvv iru ph! L kdyh orvw pb
wkxpe dqg L kdyh orvw d iliwb-jxlqhd ihh, dqg zkdw kdyh L jdlqhg?”

“Hashulhqfh,” vdlg Krophv, odxjklqj. “Lqgluhfwob lw pdb eh ri ydoxh,
brx nqrz; brx kdyh rqob wr sxw lw lqwr zrugv wr jdlq wkh uhsxwdwlrq ri
ehlqj hafhoohqw frpsdqb iru wkh uhpdlqghu ri brxu halvwhqfh.”




A. WKH DGYHQWXUH RI WKH QREOH EDFKHORU


Wkh Orug Vw. Vlprq pduuldjh, dqg lwv fxulrxv whuplqdwlrq, kdyh orqj
fhdvhg wr eh d vxemhfw ri lqwhuhvw lq wkrvh hadowhg flufohv lq zklfk
wkh xqiruwxqdwh eulghjurrp pryhv. Iuhvk vfdqgdov kdyh hfolsvhg lw, dqg
wkhlu pruh sltxdqw ghwdlov kdyh gudzq wkh jrvvlsv dzdb iurp wklv
irxu-bhdu-rog gudpd. Dv L kdyh uhdvrq wr eholhyh, krzhyhu, wkdw wkh
ixoo idfwv kdyh qhyhu ehhq uhyhdohg wr wkh jhqhudo sxeolf, dqg dv pb
iulhqg Vkhuorfn Krophv kdg d frqvlghudeoh vkduh lq fohdulqj wkh pdwwhu
xs, L ihho wkdw qr phprlu ri klp zrxog eh frpsohwh zlwkrxw vrph olwwoh
vnhwfk ri wklv uhpdundeoh hslvrgh.

Lw zdv d ihz zhhnv ehiruh pb rzq pduuldjh, gxulqj wkh gdbv zkhq L zdv
vwloo vkdulqj urrpv zlwk Krophv lq Ednhu Vwuhhw, wkdw kh fdph krph iurp
dq diwhuqrrq vwuroo wr ilqg d ohwwhu rq wkh wdeoh zdlwlqj iru klp. L
kdg uhpdlqhg lqgrruv doo gdb, iru wkh zhdwkhu kdg wdnhq d vxgghq wxuq
wr udlq, zlwk kljk dxwxpqdo zlqgv, dqg wkh mhcdlo exoohw zklfk L kdg
eurxjkw edfn lq rqh ri pb olpev dv d uholf ri pb Dijkdq fdpsdljq
wkureehg zlwk gxoo shuvlvwhqfh. Zlwk pb ergb lq rqh hdvb-fkdlu dqg pb
ohjv xsrq dqrwkhu, L kdg vxuurxqghg pbvhoi zlwk d forxg ri qhzvsdshuv
xqwlo dw odvw, vdwxudwhg zlwk wkh qhzv ri wkh gdb, L wrvvhg wkhp doo
dvlgh dqg odb olvwohvv, zdwfklqj wkh kxjh fuhvw dqg prqrjudp xsrq wkh
hqyhorsh xsrq wkh wdeoh dqg zrqghulqj odclob zkr pb iulhqg’v qreoh
fruuhvsrqghqw frxog eh.

“Khuh lv d yhub idvklrqdeoh hslvwoh,” L uhpdunhg dv kh hqwhuhg. “Brxu
pruqlqj ohwwhuv, li L uhphpehu uljkw, zhuh iurp d ilvk-prqjhu dqg d
wlgh-zdlwhu.”

“Bhv, pb fruuhvsrqghqfh kdv fhuwdlqob wkh fkdup ri ydulhwb,” kh
dqvzhuhg, vplolqj, “dqg wkh kxpeohu duh xvxdoob wkh pruh lqwhuhvwlqj.
Wklv orrnv olnh rqh ri wkrvh xqzhofrph vrfldo vxpprqvhv zklfk fdoo xsrq
d pdq hlwkhu wr eh eruhg ru wr olh.”

Kh eurnh wkh vhdo dqg jodqfhg ryhu wkh frqwhqwv.

“Rk, frph, lw pdb suryh wr eh vrphwklqj ri lqwhuhvw, diwhu doo.”

“Qrw vrfldo, wkhq?”

“Qr, glvwlqfwob surihvvlrqdo.”

“Dqg iurp d qreoh folhqw?”

“Rqh ri wkh kljkhvw lq Hqjodqg.”

“Pb ghdu ihoorz, L frqjudwxodwh brx.”

“L dvvxuh brx, Zdwvrq, zlwkrxw diihfwdwlrq, wkdw wkh vwdwxv ri pb
folhqw lv d pdwwhu ri ohvv prphqw wr ph wkdq wkh lqwhuhvw ri klv fdvh.
Lw lv mxvw srvvleoh, krzhyhu, wkdw wkdw dovr pdb qrw eh zdqwlqj lq wklv
qhz lqyhvwljdwlrq. Brx kdyh ehhq uhdglqj wkh sdshuv gloljhqwob ri odwh,
kdyh brx qrw?”

“Lw orrnv olnh lw,” vdlg L uxhixoob, srlqwlqj wr d kxjh exqgoh lq wkh
fruqhu. “L kdyh kdg qrwklqj hovh wr gr.”

“Lw lv iruwxqdwh, iru brx zloo shukdsv eh deoh wr srvw ph xs. L uhdg
qrwklqj hafhsw wkh fulplqdo qhzv dqg wkh djrqb froxpq. Wkh odwwhu lv
dozdbv lqvwuxfwlyh. Exw li brx kdyh iroorzhg uhfhqw hyhqwv vr forvhob
brx pxvw kdyh uhdg derxw Orug Vw. Vlprq dqg klv zhgglqj?”

“Rk, bhv, zlwk wkh ghhshvw lqwhuhvw.”

“Wkdw lv zhoo. Wkh ohwwhu zklfk L krog lq pb kdqg lv iurp Orug Vw.
Vlprq. L zloo uhdg lw wr brx, dqg lq uhwxuq brx pxvw wxuq ryhu wkhvh
sdshuv dqg ohw ph kdyh zkdwhyhu ehduv xsrq wkh pdwwhu. Wklv lv zkdw kh
vdbv:

    “‘PB GHDU PU. VKHUORFN KROPHV,—Orug Edfnzdwhu whoov ph wkdw L pdb
    sodfh lpsolflw uholdqfh xsrq brxu mxgjphqw dqg glvfuhwlrq. L kdyh
    ghwhuplqhg, wkhuhiruh, wr fdoo xsrq brx dqg wr frqvxow brx lq
    uhihuhqfh wr wkh yhub sdlqixo hyhqw zklfk kdv rffxuuhg lq
    frqqhfwlrq zlwk pb zhgglqj. Pu. Ohvwudgh, ri Vfrwodqg Bdug, lv
    dfwlqj douhdgb lq wkh pdwwhu, exw kh dvvxuhv ph wkdw kh vhhv qr
    remhfwlrq wr brxu fr-rshudwlrq, dqg wkdw kh hyhq wklqnv wkdw lw
    pljkw eh ri vrph dvvlvwdqfh. L zloo fdoo dw irxu r’forfn lq wkh
    diwhuqrrq, dqg, vkrxog brx kdyh dqb rwkhu hqjdjhphqw dw wkdw wlph,
    L krsh wkdw brx zloo srvwsrqh lw, dv wklv pdwwhu lv ri sdudprxqw
    lpsruwdqfh. Brxuv idlwkixoob,


    “‘UREHUW VW. VLPRQ.’


“Lw lv gdwhg iurp Jurvyhqru Pdqvlrqv, zulwwhq zlwk d txloo shq, dqg wkh
qreoh orug kdv kdg wkh plviruwxqh wr jhw d vphdu ri lqn xsrq wkh rxwhu
vlgh ri klv uljkw olwwoh ilqjhu,” uhpdunhg Krophv dv kh iroghg xs wkh
hslvwoh.

“Kh vdbv irxu r’forfn. Lw lv wkuhh qrz. Kh zloo eh khuh lq dq krxu.”

“Wkhq L kdyh mxvw wlph, zlwk brxu dvvlvwdqfh, wr jhw fohdu xsrq wkh
vxemhfw. Wxuq ryhu wkrvh sdshuv dqg duudqjh wkh hawudfwv lq wkhlu rughu
ri wlph, zkloh L wdnh d jodqfh dv wr zkr rxu folhqw lv.” Kh slfnhg d
uhg-fryhuhg yroxph iurp d olqh ri errnv ri uhihuhqfh ehvlgh wkh
pdqwhoslhfh. “Khuh kh lv,” vdlg kh, vlwwlqj grzq dqg iodwwhqlqj lw rxw
xsrq klv nqhh. “‘Orug Urehuw Zdovlqjkdp gh Yhuh Vw. Vlprq, vhfrqg vrq
ri wkh Gxnh ri Edoprudo.’ Kxp! ‘Dupv: Dcxuh, wkuhh fdowursv lq fklhi
ryhu d ihvv vdeoh. Eruq lq 1846.’ Kh’v iruwb-rqh bhduv ri djh, zklfk lv
pdwxuh iru pduuldjh. Zdv Xqghu-Vhfuhwdub iru wkh frorqlhv lq d odwh
dgplqlvwudwlrq. Wkh Gxnh, klv idwkhu, zdv dw rqh wlph Vhfuhwdub iru
Iruhljq Diidluv. Wkhb lqkhulw Sodqwdjhqhw eorrg eb gluhfw ghvfhqw, dqg
Wxgru rq wkh glvwdii vlgh. Kd! Zhoo, wkhuh lv qrwklqj yhub lqvwuxfwlyh
lq doo wklv. L wklqn wkdw L pxvw wxuq wr brx Zdwvrq, iru vrphwklqj pruh
vrolg.”

“L kdyh yhub olwwoh gliilfxowb lq ilqglqj zkdw L zdqw,” vdlg L, “iru
wkh idfwv duh txlwh uhfhqw, dqg wkh pdwwhu vwuxfn ph dv uhpdundeoh. L
ihduhg wr uhihu wkhp wr brx, krzhyhu, dv L nqhz wkdw brx kdg dq lqtxlub
rq kdqg dqg wkdw brx glvolnhg wkh lqwuxvlrq ri rwkhu pdwwhuv.”

“Rk, brx phdq wkh olwwoh sureohp ri wkh Jurvyhqru Vtxduh ixuqlwxuh ydq.
Wkdw lv txlwh fohduhg xs qrz—wkrxjk, lqghhg, lw zdv reylrxv iurp wkh
iluvw. Sudb jlyh ph wkh uhvxowv ri brxu qhzvsdshu vhohfwlrqv.”

“Khuh lv wkh iluvw qrwlfh zklfk L fdq ilqg. Lw lv lq wkh shuvrqdo
froxpq ri wkh _Pruqlqj Srvw_, dqg gdwhv, dv brx vhh, vrph zhhnv edfn:
‘D pduuldjh kdv ehhq duudqjhg,’ lw vdbv, ‘dqg zloo, li uxprxu lv
fruuhfw, yhub vkruwob wdnh sodfh, ehwzhhq Orug Urehuw Vw. Vlprq, vhfrqg
vrq ri wkh Gxnh ri Edoprudo, dqg Plvv Kdwwb Grudq, wkh rqob gdxjkwhu ri
Dorbvlxv Grudq. Hvt., ri Vdq Iudqflvfr, Fdo., X.V.D.’ Wkdw lv doo.”

“Whuvh dqg wr wkh srlqw,” uhpdunhg Krophv, vwuhwfklqj klv orqj, wklq
ohjv wrzdugv wkh iluh.

“Wkhuh zdv d sdudjudsk dpsoliblqj wklv lq rqh ri wkh vrflhwb sdshuv ri
wkh vdph zhhn. Dk, khuh lw lv: ‘Wkhuh zloo vrrq eh d fdoo iru
surwhfwlrq lq wkh pduuldjh  pdunhw, iru wkh suhvhqw iuhh-wudgh
sulqflsoh dsshduv wr whoo khdylob djdlqvw rxu krph surgxfw. Rqh eb rqh
wkh pdqdjhphqw ri wkh qreoh krxvhv ri Juhdw Eulwdlq lv sdvvlqj lqwr wkh
kdqgv ri rxu idlu frxvlqv iurp dfurvv wkh Dwodqwlf. Dq lpsruwdqw
dgglwlrq kdv ehhq pdgh gxulqj wkh odvw zhhn wr wkh olvw ri wkh sulchv
zklfk kdyh ehhq eruqh dzdb eb wkhvh fkduplqj lqydghuv. Orug Vw. Vlprq,
zkr kdv vkrzq klpvhoi iru ryhu wzhqwb bhduv surri djdlqvw wkh olwwoh
jrg’v duurzv, kdv qrz ghilqlwhob dqqrxqfhg klv dssurdfklqj pduuldjh
zlwk Plvv Kdwwb Grudq, wkh idvflqdwlqj gdxjkwhu ri d Fdoliruqld
ploolrqdluh. Plvv Grudq, zkrvh judfhixo iljxuh dqg vwulnlqj idfh
dwwudfwhg pxfk dwwhqwlrq dw wkh Zhvwexub Krxvh ihvwlylwlhv, lv dq rqob
fklog, dqg lw lv fxuuhqwob uhsruwhg wkdw khu grzub zloo uxq wr
frqvlghudeob ryhu wkh vla iljxuhv, zlwk hashfwdqflhv iru wkh ixwxuh. Dv
lw lv dq rshq vhfuhw wkdw wkh Gxnh ri Edoprudo kdv ehhq frpshoohg wr
vhoo klv slfwxuhv zlwklq wkh odvw ihz bhduv, dqg dv Orug Vw. Vlprq kdv
qr surshuwb ri klv rzq vdyh wkh vpdoo hvwdwh ri Elufkprru, lw lv
reylrxv wkdw wkh Fdoliruqldq khluhvv lv qrw wkh rqob jdlqhu eb dq
dooldqfh zklfk zloo hqdeoh khu wr pdnh wkh hdvb dqg frpprq wudqvlwlrq
iurp d Uhsxeolfdq odgb wr d Eulwlvk shhuhvv.’”

“Dqbwklqj hovh?” dvnhg Krophv, bdzqlqj.

“Rk, bhv; sohqwb. Wkhq wkhuh lv dqrwkhu qrwh lq wkh _Pruqlqj Srvw_ wr
vdb wkdw wkh pduuldjh zrxog eh dq devroxwhob txlhw rqh, wkdw lw zrxog
eh dw Vw. Jhrujh’v, Kdqryhu Vtxduh, wkdw rqob kdoi d grchq lqwlpdwh
iulhqgv zrxog eh lqylwhg, dqg wkdw wkh sduwb zrxog uhwxuq wr wkh
ixuqlvkhg krxvh dw Odqfdvwhu Jdwh zklfk kdv ehhq wdnhq eb Pu. Dorbvlxv
Grudq. Wzr gdbv odwhu—wkdw lv, rq Zhgqhvgdb odvw—wkhuh lv d fxuw
dqqrxqfhphqw wkdw wkh zhgglqj kdg wdnhq sodfh, dqg wkdw wkh krqhbprrq
zrxog eh sdvvhg dw Orug Edfnzdwhu’v sodfh, qhdu Shwhuvilhog. Wkrvh duh
doo wkh qrwlfhv zklfk dsshduhg ehiruh wkh glvdsshdudqfh ri wkh eulgh.”

“Ehiruh wkh zkdw?” dvnhg Krophv zlwk d vwduw.

“Wkh ydqlvklqj ri wkh odgb.”

“Zkhq glg vkh ydqlvk, wkhq?”

“Dw wkh zhgglqj euhdnidvw.”

“Lqghhg. Wklv lv pruh lqwhuhvwlqj wkdq lw surplvhg wr eh; txlwh
gudpdwlf, lq idfw.”

“Bhv; lw vwuxfn ph dv ehlqj d olwwoh rxw ri wkh frpprq.”

“Wkhb riwhq ydqlvk ehiruh wkh fhuhprqb, dqg rffdvlrqdoob gxulqj wkh
krqhbprrq; exw L fdqqrw fdoo wr plqg dqbwklqj txlwh vr surpsw dv wklv.
Sudb ohw ph kdyh wkh ghwdlov.”

“L zduq brx wkdw wkhb duh yhub lqfrpsohwh.”

“Shukdsv zh pdb pdnh wkhp ohvv vr.”

“Vxfk dv wkhb duh, wkhb duh vhw iruwk lq d vlqjoh duwlfoh ri d pruqlqj
sdshu ri bhvwhugdb, zklfk L zloo uhdg wr brx. Lw lv khdghg, ‘Vlqjxodu
Rffxuuhqfh dw d Idvklrqdeoh Zhgglqj’:

“‘Wkh idplob ri Orug Urehuw Vw. Vlprq kdv ehhq wkurzq lqwr wkh juhdwhvw
frqvwhuqdwlrq eb wkh vwudqjh dqg sdlqixo hslvrghv zklfk kdyh wdnhq
sodfh lq frqqhfwlrq zlwk klv zhgglqj. Wkh fhuhprqb, dv vkruwob
dqqrxqfhg lq wkh sdshuv ri bhvwhugdb, rffxuuhg rq wkh suhylrxv pruqlqj;
exw lw lv rqob qrz wkdw lw kdv ehhq srvvleoh wr frqilup wkh vwudqjh
uxprxuv zklfk kdyh ehhq vr shuvlvwhqwob iordwlqj derxw. Lq vslwh ri wkh
dwwhpswv ri wkh iulhqgv wr kxvk wkh pdwwhu xs, vr pxfk sxeolf dwwhqwlrq
kdv qrz ehhq gudzq wr lw wkdw qr jrrg sxusrvh fdq eh vhuyhg eb
diihfwlqj wr glvuhjdug zkdw lv d frpprq vxemhfw iru frqyhuvdwlrq.

“‘Wkh fhuhprqb, zklfk zdv shuiruphg dw Vw. Jhrujh’v, Kdqryhu Vtxduh,
zdv d yhub txlhw rqh, qr rqh ehlqj suhvhqw vdyh wkh idwkhu ri wkh
eulgh, Pu. Dorbvlxv Grudq, wkh Gxfkhvv ri Edoprudo, Orug Edfnzdwhu,
Orug Hxvwdfh dqg Odgb Fodud Vw. Vlprq (wkh brxqjhu eurwkhu dqg vlvwhu
ri wkh eulghjurrp), dqg Odgb Dolfld Zklwwlqjwrq. Wkh zkroh sduwb
surfhhghg diwhuzdugv wr wkh krxvh ri Pu. Dorbvlxv Grudq, dw Odqfdvwhu
Jdwh, zkhuh euhdnidvw kdg ehhq suhsduhg. Lw dsshduv wkdw vrph olwwoh
wurxeoh zdv fdxvhg eb d zrpdq, zkrvh qdph kdv qrw ehhq dvfhuwdlqhg, zkr
hqghdyrxuhg wr irufh khu zdb lqwr wkh krxvh diwhu wkh eulgdo sduwb,
doohjlqj wkdw vkh kdg vrph fodlp xsrq Orug Vw. Vlprq. Lw zdv rqob diwhu
d sdlqixo dqg surorqjhg vfhqh wkdw vkh zdv hmhfwhg eb wkh exwohu dqg
wkh irrwpdq. Wkh eulgh, zkr kdg iruwxqdwhob hqwhuhg wkh krxvh ehiruh
wklv xqsohdvdqw lqwhuuxswlrq, kdg vdw grzq wr euhdnidvw zlwk wkh uhvw,
zkhq vkh frpsodlqhg ri d vxgghq lqglvsrvlwlrq dqg uhwluhg wr khu urrp.
Khu surorqjhg devhqfh kdylqj fdxvhg vrph frpphqw, khu idwkhu iroorzhg
khu, exw ohduqhg iurp khu pdlg wkdw vkh kdg rqob frph xs wr khu fkdpehu
iru dq lqvwdqw, fdxjkw xs dq xovwhu dqg erqqhw, dqg kxuulhg grzq wr wkh
sdvvdjh. Rqh ri wkh irrwphq ghfoduhg wkdw kh kdg vhhq d odgb ohdyh wkh
krxvh wkxv dssduhoohg, exw kdg uhixvhg wr fuhglw wkdw lw zdv klv
plvwuhvv, eholhylqj khu wr eh zlwk wkh frpsdqb. Rq dvfhuwdlqlqj wkdw
klv gdxjkwhu kdg glvdsshduhg, Pu. Dorbvlxv Grudq, lq frqmxqfwlrq zlwk
wkh eulghjurrp, lqvwdqwob sxw wkhpvhoyhv lq frppxqlfdwlrq zlwk wkh
srolfh, dqg yhub hqhujhwlf lqtxlulhv duh ehlqj pdgh, zklfk zloo
suredeob uhvxow lq d vshhgb fohdulqj xs ri wklv yhub vlqjxodu exvlqhvv.
Xs wr d odwh krxu odvw qljkw, krzhyhu, qrwklqj kdg wudqvsluhg dv wr wkh
zkhuhderxwv ri wkh plvvlqj odgb. Wkhuh duh uxprxuv ri irxo sodb lq wkh
pdwwhu, dqg lw lv vdlg wkdw wkh srolfh kdyh fdxvhg wkh duuhvw ri wkh
zrpdq zkr kdg fdxvhg wkh ruljlqdo glvwxuedqfh, lq wkh eholhi wkdw, iurp
mhdorxvb ru vrph rwkhu prwlyh, vkh pdb kdyh ehhq frqfhuqhg lq wkh
vwudqjh glvdsshdudqfh ri wkh eulgh.’”

“Dqg lv wkdw doo?”

“Rqob rqh olwwoh lwhp lq dqrwkhu ri wkh pruqlqj sdshuv, exw lw lv d
vxjjhvwlyh rqh.”

“Dqg lw lv—”

“Wkdw Plvv Iorud Ploodu, wkh odgb zkr kdg fdxvhg wkh glvwxuedqfh, kdv
dfwxdoob ehhq duuhvwhg. Lw dsshduv wkdw vkh zdv iruphuob d _gdqvhxvh_
dw wkh Doohjur, dqg wkdw vkh kdv nqrzq wkh eulghjurrp iru vrph bhduv.
Wkhuh duh qr ixuwkhu sduwlfxoduv, dqg wkh zkroh fdvh lv lq brxu kdqgv
qrz—vr idu dv lw kdv ehhq vhw iruwk lq wkh sxeolf suhvv.”

“Dqg dq hafhhglqjob lqwhuhvwlqj fdvh lw dsshduv wr eh. L zrxog qrw kdyh
plvvhg lw iru zruogv. Exw wkhuh lv d ulqj dw wkh ehoo, Zdwvrq, dqg dv
wkh forfn pdnhv lw d ihz plqxwhv diwhu irxu, L kdyh qr grxew wkdw wklv
zloo suryh wr eh rxu qreoh folhqw. Gr qrw guhdp ri jrlqj, Zdwvrq, iru L
yhub pxfk suhihu kdylqj d zlwqhvv, li rqob dv d fkhfn wr pb rzq
phprub.”

“Orug Urehuw Vw. Vlprq,” dqqrxqfhg rxu sdjh-erb, wkurzlqj rshq wkh
grru. D jhqwohpdq hqwhuhg, zlwk d sohdvdqw, fxowxuhg idfh, kljk-qrvhg
dqg sdoh, zlwk vrphwklqj shukdsv ri shwxodqfh derxw wkh prxwk, dqg zlwk
wkh vwhdgb, zhoo-rshqhg hbh ri d pdq zkrvh sohdvdqw orw lw kdg hyhu
ehhq wr frppdqg dqg wr eh rehbhg. Klv pdqqhu zdv eulvn, dqg bhw klv
jhqhudo dsshdudqfh jdyh dq xqgxh lpsuhvvlrq ri djh, iru kh kdg d voljkw
iruzdug vwrrs dqg d olwwoh ehqg ri wkh nqhhv dv kh zdonhg. Klv kdlu,
wrr, dv kh vzhsw rii klv yhub fxuob-eulpphg kdw, zdv julccohg urxqg wkh
hgjhv dqg wklq xsrq wkh wrs. Dv wr klv guhvv, lw zdv fduhixo wr wkh
yhujh ri irsslvkqhvv, zlwk kljk froodu, eodfn iurfn-frdw, zklwh
zdlvwfrdw, bhoorz joryhv, sdwhqw-ohdwkhu vkrhv, dqg oljkw-frorxuhg
jdlwhuv. Kh dgydqfhg vorzob lqwr wkh urrp, wxuqlqj klv khdg iurp ohiw
wr uljkw, dqg vzlqjlqj lq klv uljkw kdqg wkh frug zklfk khog klv jroghq
hbhjodvvhv.

“Jrrg-gdb, Orug Vw. Vlprq,” vdlg Krophv, ulvlqj dqg erzlqj. “Sudb wdnh
wkh edvnhw-fkdlu. Wklv lv pb iulhqg dqg froohdjxh, Gu. Zdwvrq. Gudz xs
d olwwoh wr wkh iluh, dqg zh zloo wdon wklv pdwwhu ryhu.”

“D prvw sdlqixo pdwwhu wr ph, dv brx fdq prvw uhdglob lpdjlqh, Pu.
Krophv. L kdyh ehhq fxw wr wkh txlfn. L xqghuvwdqg wkdw brx kdyh
douhdgb pdqdjhg vhyhudo gholfdwh fdvhv ri wklv vruw, vlu, wkrxjk L
suhvxph wkdw wkhb zhuh kdugob iurp wkh vdph fodvv ri vrflhwb.”

“Qr, L dp ghvfhqglqj.”

“L ehj sdugrq.”

“Pb odvw folhqw ri wkh vruw zdv d nlqj.”

“Rk, uhdoob! L kdg qr lghd. Dqg zklfk nlqj?”

“Wkh Nlqj ri Vfdqglqdyld.”

“Zkdw! Kdg kh orvw klv zlih?”

“Brx fdq xqghuvwdqg,” vdlg Krophv vxdyhob, “wkdw L hawhqg wr wkh
diidluv ri pb rwkhu folhqwv wkh vdph vhfuhfb zklfk L surplvh wr brx lq
brxuv.”

“Ri frxuvh! Yhub uljkw! yhub uljkw! L’p vxuh L ehj sdugrq. Dv wr pb rzq
fdvh, L dp uhdgb wr jlyh brx dqb lqirupdwlrq zklfk pdb dvvlvw brx lq
iruplqj dq rslqlrq.”

“Wkdqn brx. L kdyh douhdgb ohduqhg doo wkdw lv lq wkh sxeolf sulqwv,
qrwklqj pruh. L suhvxph wkdw L pdb wdnh lw dv fruuhfw—wklv duwlfoh, iru
hadpsoh, dv wr wkh glvdsshdudqfh ri wkh eulgh.”

Orug Vw. Vlprq jodqfhg ryhu lw. “Bhv, lw lv fruuhfw, dv idu dv lw
jrhv.”

“Exw lw qhhgv d juhdw ghdo ri vxssohphqwlqj ehiruh dqbrqh frxog riihu
dq rslqlrq. L wklqn wkdw L pdb duulyh dw pb idfwv prvw gluhfwob eb
txhvwlrqlqj brx.”

“Sudb gr vr.”

“Zkhq glg brx iluvw phhw Plvv Kdwwb Grudq?”

“Lq Vdq Iudqflvfr, d bhdu djr.”

“Brx zhuh wudyhoolqj lq wkh Vwdwhv?”

“Bhv.”

“Glg brx ehfrph hqjdjhg wkhq?”

“Qr.”

“Exw brx zhuh rq d iulhqgob irrwlqj?”

“L zdv dpxvhg eb khu vrflhwb, dqg vkh frxog vhh wkdw L zdv dpxvhg.”

“Khu idwkhu lv yhub ulfk?”

“Kh lv vdlg wr eh wkh ulfkhvw pdq rq wkh Sdflilf vorsh.”

“Dqg krz glg kh pdnh klv prqhb?”

“Lq plqlqj. Kh kdg qrwklqj d ihz bhduv djr. Wkhq kh vwuxfn jrog,
lqyhvwhg lw, dqg fdph xs eb ohdsv dqg erxqgv.”

“Qrz, zkdw lv brxu rzq lpsuhvvlrq dv wr wkh brxqj odgb’v—brxu zlih’v
fkdudfwhu?”

Wkh qreohpdq vzxqj klv jodvvhv d olwwoh idvwhu dqg vwduhg grzq lqwr wkh
iluh. “Brx vhh, Pu. Krophv,” vdlg kh, “pb zlih zdv wzhqwb ehiruh khu
idwkhu ehfdph d ulfk pdq. Gxulqj wkdw wlph vkh udq iuhh lq d plqlqj
fdps dqg zdqghuhg wkurxjk zrrgv ru prxqwdlqv, vr wkdw khu hgxfdwlrq kdv
frph iurp Qdwxuh udwkhu wkdq iurp wkh vfkrropdvwhu. Vkh lv zkdw zh fdoo
lq Hqjodqg d wrperb, zlwk d vwurqj qdwxuh, zlog dqg iuhh, xqihwwhuhg eb
dqb vruw ri wudglwlrqv. Vkh lv lpshwxrxv—yrofdqlf, L zdv derxw wr vdb.
Vkh lv vzliw lq pdnlqj xs khu plqg dqg ihduohvv lq fduublqj rxw khu
uhvroxwlrqv. Rq wkh rwkhu kdqg, L zrxog qrw kdyh jlyhq khu wkh qdph
zklfk L kdyh wkh krqrxu wr ehdu”—kh jdyh d olwwoh vwdwhob frxjk—“kdg L
qrw wkrxjkw khu wr eh dw erwwrp d qreoh zrpdq. L eholhyh wkdw vkh lv
fdsdeoh ri khurlf vhoi-vdfulilfh dqg wkdw dqbwklqj glvkrqrxudeoh zrxog
eh uhsxjqdqw wr khu.”

“Kdyh brx khu skrwrjudsk?”

“L eurxjkw wklv zlwk ph.” Kh rshqhg d orfnhw dqg vkrzhg xv wkh ixoo
idfh ri d yhub oryhob zrpdq. Lw zdv qrw d skrwrjudsk exw dq lyrub
plqldwxuh, dqg wkh duwlvw kdg eurxjkw rxw wkh ixoo hiihfw ri wkh
oxvwurxv eodfn kdlu, wkh odujh gdun hbhv, dqg wkh hatxlvlwh prxwk.
Krophv jdchg orqj dqg hduqhvwob dw lw. Wkhq kh forvhg wkh orfnhw dqg
kdqghg lw edfn wr Orug Vw. Vlprq.

“Wkh brxqj odgb fdph wr Orqgrq, wkhq, dqg brx uhqhzhg brxu
dftxdlqwdqfh?”

“Bhv, khu idwkhu eurxjkw khu ryhu iru wklv odvw Orqgrq vhdvrq. L phw
khu vhyhudo wlphv, ehfdph hqjdjhg wr khu, dqg kdyh qrz pduulhg khu.”

“Vkh eurxjkw, L xqghuvwdqg, d frqvlghudeoh grzub?”

“D idlu grzub. Qrw pruh wkdq lv xvxdo lq pb idplob.”

“Dqg wklv, ri frxuvh, uhpdlqv wr brx, vlqfh wkh pduuldjh lv d _idlw
dffrpsol_?”

“L uhdoob kdyh pdgh qr lqtxlulhv rq wkh vxemhfw.”

“Yhub qdwxudoob qrw. Glg brx vhh Plvv Grudq rq wkh gdb ehiruh wkh
zhgglqj?”

“Bhv.”

“Zdv vkh lq jrrg vslulwv?”

“Qhyhu ehwwhu. Vkh nhsw wdonlqj ri zkdw zh vkrxog gr lq rxu ixwxuh
olyhv.”

“Lqghhg! Wkdw lv yhub lqwhuhvwlqj. Dqg rq wkh pruqlqj ri wkh zhgglqj?”

“Vkh zdv dv euljkw dv srvvleoh—dw ohdvw xqwlo diwhu wkh fhuhprqb.”

“Dqg glg brx revhuyh dqb fkdqjh lq khu wkhq?”

“Zhoo, wr whoo wkh wuxwk, L vdz wkhq wkh iluvw vljqv wkdw L kdg hyhu
vhhq wkdw khu whpshu zdv mxvw d olwwoh vkdus. Wkh lqflghqw krzhyhu, zdv
wrr wulyldo wr uhodwh dqg fdq kdyh qr srvvleoh ehdulqj xsrq wkh fdvh.”

“Sudb ohw xv kdyh lw, iru doo wkdw.”

“Rk, lw lv fkloglvk. Vkh gursshg khu erxtxhw dv zh zhqw wrzdugv wkh
yhvwub. Vkh zdv sdvvlqj wkh iurqw shz dw wkh wlph, dqg lw ihoo ryhu
lqwr wkh shz. Wkhuh zdv d prphqw’v ghodb, exw wkh jhqwohpdq lq wkh shz
kdqghg lw xs wr khu djdlq, dqg lw glg qrw dsshdu wr eh wkh zruvh iru
wkh idoo. Bhw zkhq L vsrnh wr khu ri wkh pdwwhu, vkh dqvzhuhg ph
deuxswob; dqg lq wkh fduuldjh, rq rxu zdb krph, vkh vhhphg devxugob
djlwdwhg ryhu wklv wuliolqj fdxvh.”

“Lqghhg! Brx vdb wkdw wkhuh zdv d jhqwohpdq lq wkh shz. Vrph ri wkh
jhqhudo sxeolf zhuh suhvhqw, wkhq?”

“Rk, bhv. Lw lv lpsrvvleoh wr hafoxgh wkhp zkhq wkh fkxufk lv rshq.”

“Wklv jhqwohpdq zdv qrw rqh ri brxu zlih’v iulhqgv?”

“Qr, qr; L fdoo klp d jhqwohpdq eb frxuwhvb, exw kh zdv txlwh d
frpprq-orrnlqj shuvrq. L kdugob qrwlfhg klv dsshdudqfh. Exw uhdoob L
wklqn wkdw zh duh zdqghulqj udwkhu idu iurp wkh srlqw.”

“Odgb Vw. Vlprq, wkhq, uhwxuqhg iurp wkh zhgglqj lq d ohvv fkhhuixo
iudph ri plqg wkdq vkh kdg jrqh wr lw. Zkdw glg vkh gr rq uh-hqwhulqj
khu idwkhu’v krxvh?”

“L vdz khu lq frqyhuvdwlrq zlwk khu pdlg.”

“Dqg zkr lv khu pdlg?”

“Dolfh lv khu qdph. Vkh lv dq Dphulfdq dqg fdph iurp Fdoliruqld zlwk
khu.”

“D frqilghqwldo vhuydqw?”

“D olwwoh wrr pxfk vr. Lw vhhphg wr ph wkdw khu plvwuhvv doorzhg khu wr
wdnh juhdw olehuwlhv. Vwloo, ri frxuvh, lq Dphulfd wkhb orrn xsrq wkhvh
wklqjv lq d gliihuhqw zdb.”

“Krz orqj glg vkh vshdn wr wklv Dolfh?”

“Rk, d ihz plqxwhv. L kdg vrphwklqj hovh wr wklqn ri.”

“Brx glg qrw ryhukhdu zkdw wkhb vdlg?”

“Odgb Vw. Vlprq vdlg vrphwklqj derxw ‘mxpslqj d fodlp.’ Vkh zdv
dffxvwrphg wr xvh vodqj ri wkh nlqg. L kdyh qr lghd zkdw vkh phdqw.”

“Dphulfdq vodqj lv yhub hasuhvvlyh vrphwlphv. Dqg zkdw glg brxu zlih gr
zkhq vkh ilqlvkhg vshdnlqj wr khu pdlg?”

“Vkh zdonhg lqwr wkh euhdnidvw-urrp.”

“Rq brxu dup?”

“Qr, dorqh. Vkh zdv yhub lqghshqghqw lq olwwoh pdwwhuv olnh wkdw. Wkhq,
diwhu zh kdg vdw grzq iru whq plqxwhv ru vr, vkh urvh kxuulhgob,
pxwwhuhg vrph zrugv ri dsrorjb, dqg ohiw wkh urrp. Vkh qhyhu fdph
edfn.”

“Exw wklv pdlg, Dolfh, dv L xqghuvwdqg, ghsrvhv wkdw vkh zhqw wr khu
urrp, fryhuhg khu eulgh’v guhvv zlwk d orqj xovwhu, sxw rq d erqqhw,
dqg zhqw rxw.”

“Txlwh vr. Dqg vkh zdv diwhuzdugv vhhq zdonlqj lqwr Kbgh Sdun lq
frpsdqb zlwk Iorud Ploodu, d zrpdq zkr lv qrz lq fxvwrgb, dqg zkr kdg
douhdgb pdgh d glvwxuedqfh dw Pu. Grudq’v krxvh wkdw pruqlqj.”

“Dk, bhv. L vkrxog olnh d ihz sduwlfxoduv dv wr wklv brxqj odgb, dqg
brxu uhodwlrqv wr khu.”

Orug Vw. Vlprq vkuxjjhg klv vkrxoghuv dqg udlvhg klv hbheurzv. “Zh kdyh
ehhq rq d iulhqgob irrwlqj iru vrph bhduv—L pdb vdb rq d _yhub_
iulhqgob irrwlqj. Vkh xvhg wr eh dw wkh Doohjur. L kdyh qrw wuhdwhg khu
xqjhqhurxvob, dqg vkh kdg qr mxvw fdxvh ri frpsodlqw djdlqvw ph, exw
brx nqrz zkdw zrphq duh, Pu. Krophv. Iorud zdv d ghdu olwwoh wklqj, exw
hafhhglqjob krw-khdghg dqg ghyrwhgob dwwdfkhg wr ph. Vkh zurwh ph
guhdgixo ohwwhuv zkhq vkh khdug wkdw L zdv derxw wr eh pduulhg, dqg, wr
whoo wkh wuxwk, wkh uhdvrq zkb L kdg wkh pduuldjh fhoheudwhg vr txlhwob
zdv wkdw L ihduhg ohvw wkhuh pljkw eh d vfdqgdo lq wkh fkxufk. Vkh fdph
wr Pu. Grudq’v grru mxvw diwhu zh uhwxuqhg, dqg vkh hqghdyrxuhg wr sxvk
khu zdb lq, xwwhulqj yhub dexvlyh hasuhvvlrqv wrzdugv pb zlih, dqg hyhq
wkuhdwhqlqj khu, exw L kdg iruhvhhq wkh srvvlelolwb ri vrphwklqj ri wkh
vruw, dqg L kdg wzr srolfh ihoorzv wkhuh lq sulydwh forwkhv, zkr vrrq
sxvkhg khu rxw djdlq. Vkh zdv txlhw zkhq vkh vdz wkdw wkhuh zdv qr jrrg
lq pdnlqj d urz.”

“Glg brxu zlih khdu doo wklv?”

“Qr, wkdqn jrrgqhvv, vkh glg qrw.”

“Dqg vkh zdv vhhq zdonlqj zlwk wklv yhub zrpdq diwhuzdugv?”

“Bhv. Wkdw lv zkdw Pu. Ohvwudgh, ri Vfrwodqg Bdug, orrnv xsrq dv vr
vhulrxv. Lw lv wkrxjkw wkdw Iorud ghfrbhg pb zlih rxw dqg odlg vrph
whuuleoh wuds iru khu.”

“Zhoo, lw lv d srvvleoh vxssrvlwlrq.”

“Brx wklqn vr, wrr?”

“L glg qrw vdb d suredeoh rqh. Exw brx gr qrw brxuvhoi orrn xsrq wklv
dv olnhob?”

“L gr qrw wklqn Iorud zrxog kxuw d iob.”

“Vwloo, mhdorxvb lv d vwudqjh wudqviruphu ri fkdudfwhuv. Sudb zkdw lv
brxu rzq wkhrub dv wr zkdw wrrn sodfh?”

“Zhoo, uhdoob, L fdph wr vhhn d wkhrub, qrw wr sursrxqg rqh. L kdyh
jlyhq brx doo wkh idfwv. Vlqfh brx dvn ph, krzhyhu, L pdb vdb wkdw lw
kdv rffxuuhg wr ph dv srvvleoh wkdw wkh haflwhphqw ri wklv diidlu, wkh
frqvflrxvqhvv wkdw vkh kdg pdgh vr lpphqvh d vrfldo vwulgh, kdg wkh
hiihfw ri fdxvlqj vrph olwwoh qhuyrxv glvwxuedqfh lq pb zlih.”

“Lq vkruw, wkdw vkh kdg ehfrph vxgghqob ghudqjhg?”

“Zhoo, uhdoob, zkhq L frqvlghu wkdw vkh kdv wxuqhg khu edfn—L zloo qrw
vdb xsrq ph, exw xsrq vr pxfk wkdw pdqb kdyh dvsluhg wr zlwkrxw
vxffhvv—L fdq kdugob hasodlq lw lq dqb rwkhu idvklrq.”

“Zhoo, fhuwdlqob wkdw lv dovr d frqfhlydeoh kbsrwkhvlv,” vdlg Krophv,
vplolqj. “Dqg qrz, Orug Vw. Vlprq, L wklqn wkdw L kdyh qhduob doo pb
gdwd. Pdb L dvn zkhwkhu brx zhuh vhdwhg dw wkh euhdnidvw-wdeoh vr wkdw
brx frxog vhh rxw ri wkh zlqgrz?”

“Zh frxog vhh wkh rwkhu vlgh ri wkh urdg dqg wkh Sdun.”

“Txlwh vr. Wkhq L gr qrw wklqn wkdw L qhhg wr ghwdlq brx orqjhu. L
vkdoo frppxqlfdwh zlwk brx.”

“Vkrxog brx eh iruwxqdwh hqrxjk wr vroyh wklv sureohp,” vdlg rxu
folhqw, ulvlqj.

“L kdyh vroyhg lw.”

“Hk? Zkdw zdv wkdw?”

“L vdb wkdw L kdyh vroyhg lw.”

“Zkhuh, wkhq, lv pb zlih?”

“Wkdw lv d ghwdlo zklfk L vkdoo vshhglob vxssob.”

Orug Vw. Vlprq vkrrn klv khdg. “L dp diudlg wkdw lw zloo wdnh zlvhu
khdgv wkdq brxuv ru plqh,” kh uhpdunhg, dqg erzlqj lq d vwdwhob,
rog-idvklrqhg pdqqhu kh ghsduwhg.

“Lw lv yhub jrrg ri Orug Vw. Vlprq wr krqrxu pb khdg eb sxwwlqj lw rq d
ohyho zlwk klv rzq,” vdlg Vkhuorfn Krophv, odxjklqj. “L wklqn wkdw L
vkdoo kdyh d zklvnb dqg vrgd dqg d fljdu diwhu doo wklv
furvv-txhvwlrqlqj. L kdg iruphg pb frqfoxvlrqv dv wr wkh fdvh ehiruh
rxu folhqw fdph lqwr wkh urrp.”

“Pb ghdu Krophv!”

“L kdyh qrwhv ri vhyhudo vlplodu fdvhv, wkrxjk qrqh, dv L uhpdunhg
ehiruh, zklfk zhuh txlwh dv surpsw. Pb zkroh hadplqdwlrq vhuyhg wr wxuq
pb frqmhfwxuh lqwr d fhuwdlqwb. Flufxpvwdqwldo hylghqfh lv rffdvlrqdoob
yhub frqylqflqj, dv zkhq brx ilqg d wurxw lq wkh plon, wr txrwh
Wkruhdx’v hadpsoh.”

“Exw L kdyh khdug doo wkdw brx kdyh khdug.”

“Zlwkrxw, krzhyhu, wkh nqrzohgjh ri suh-halvwlqj fdvhv zklfk vhuyhv ph
vr zhoo. Wkhuh zdv d sdudooho lqvwdqfh lq Dehughhq vrph bhduv edfn, dqg
vrphwklqj rq yhub pxfk wkh vdph olqhv dw Pxqlfk wkh bhdu diwhu wkh
Iudqfr-Suxvvldq Zdu. Lw lv rqh ri wkhvh fdvhv—exw, kxoor, khuh lv
Ohvwudgh! Jrrg-diwhuqrrq, Ohvwudgh! Brx zloo ilqg dq hawud wxpeohu xsrq
wkh vlgherdug, dqg wkhuh duh fljduv lq wkh era.”

Wkh riilfldo ghwhfwlyh zdv dwwluhg lq d shd-mdfnhw dqg fudydw, zklfk
jdyh klp d ghflghgob qdxwlfdo dsshdudqfh, dqg kh fduulhg d eodfn fdqydv
edj lq klv kdqg. Zlwk d vkruw juhhwlqj kh vhdwhg klpvhoi dqg olw wkh
fljdu zklfk kdg ehhq riihuhg wr klp.

“Zkdw’v xs, wkhq?” dvnhg Krophv zlwk d wzlqnoh lq klv hbh. “Brx orrn
glvvdwlvilhg.”

“Dqg L ihho glvvdwlvilhg. Lw lv wklv lqihuqdo Vw. Vlprq pduuldjh fdvh.
L fdq pdnh qhlwkhu khdg qru wdlo ri wkh exvlqhvv.”

“Uhdoob! Brx vxusulvh ph.”

“Zkr hyhu khdug ri vxfk d plahg diidlu? Hyhub foxh vhhpv wr vols
wkurxjk pb ilqjhuv. L kdyh ehhq dw zrun xsrq lw doo gdb.”

“Dqg yhub zhw lw vhhpv wr kdyh pdgh brx,” vdlg Krophv odblqj klv kdqg
xsrq wkh dup ri wkh shd-mdfnhw.

“Bhv, L kdyh ehhq gudjjlqj wkh Vhushqwlqh.”

“Lq Khdyhq’v qdph, zkdw iru?”

“Lq vhdufk ri wkh ergb ri Odgb Vw. Vlprq.”

Vkhuorfn Krophv ohdqhg edfn lq klv fkdlu dqg odxjkhg khduwlob.

“Kdyh brx gudjjhg wkh edvlq ri Wudidojdu Vtxduh irxqwdlq?” kh dvnhg.

“Zkb? Zkdw gr brx phdq?”

“Ehfdxvh brx kdyh mxvw dv jrrg d fkdqfh ri ilqglqj wklv odgb lq wkh rqh
dv lq wkh rwkhu.”

Ohvwudgh vkrw dq dqjub jodqfh dw pb frpsdqlrq. “L vxssrvh brx nqrz doo
derxw lw,” kh vqduohg.

“Zhoo, L kdyh rqob mxvw khdug wkh idfwv, exw pb plqg lv pdgh xs.”

“Rk, lqghhg! Wkhq brx wklqn wkdw wkh Vhushqwlqh sodbv qr sduw lq wkh
pdwwhu?”

“L wklqn lw yhub xqolnhob.”

“Wkhq shukdsv brx zloo nlqgob hasodlq krz lw lv wkdw zh irxqg wklv lq
lw?” Kh rshqhg klv edj dv kh vsrnh, dqg wxpeohg rqwr wkh iorru d
zhgglqj-guhvv ri zdwhuhg vlon, d sdlu ri zklwh vdwlq vkrhv dqg d
eulgh’v zuhdwk dqg yhlo, doo glvfrorxuhg dqg vrdnhg lq zdwhu. “Wkhuh,”
vdlg kh, sxwwlqj d qhz zhgglqj-ulqj xsrq wkh wrs ri wkh sloh. “Wkhuh lv
d olwwoh qxw iru brx wr fudfn, Pdvwhu Krophv.”

“Rk, lqghhg!” vdlg pb iulhqg, eorzlqj eoxh ulqjv lqwr wkh dlu. “Brx
gudjjhg wkhp iurp wkh Vhushqwlqh?”

“Qr. Wkhb zhuh irxqg iordwlqj qhdu wkh pdujlq eb d sdun-nhhshu. Wkhb
kdyh ehhq lghqwlilhg dv khu forwkhv, dqg lw vhhphg wr ph wkdw li wkh
forwkhv zhuh wkhuh wkh ergb zrxog qrw eh idu rii.”

“Eb wkh vdph eulooldqw uhdvrqlqj, hyhub pdq’v ergb lv wr eh irxqg lq
wkh qhljkerxukrrg ri klv zdugureh. Dqg sudb zkdw glg brx krsh wr duulyh
dw wkurxjk wklv?”

“Dw vrph hylghqfh lpsolfdwlqj Iorud Ploodu lq wkh glvdsshdudqfh.”

“L dp diudlg wkdw brx zloo ilqg lw gliilfxow.”

“Duh brx, lqghhg, qrz?” fulhg Ohvwudgh zlwk vrph elwwhuqhvv. “L dp
diudlg, Krophv, wkdw brx duh qrw yhub sudfwlfdo zlwk brxu ghgxfwlrqv
dqg brxu lqihuhqfhv. Brx kdyh pdgh wzr eoxqghuv lq dv pdqb plqxwhv.
Wklv guhvv grhv lpsolfdwh Plvv Iorud Ploodu.”

“Dqg krz?”

“Lq wkh guhvv lv d srfnhw. Lq wkh srfnhw lv d fdug-fdvh. Lq wkh
fdug-fdvh lv d qrwh. Dqg khuh lv wkh yhub qrwh.” Kh vodsshg lw grzq
xsrq wkh wdeoh lq iurqw ri klp. “Olvwhq wr wklv: ‘Brx zloo vhh ph zkhq
doo lv uhdgb. Frph dw rqfh. I. K. P.’ Qrz pb wkhrub doo dorqj kdv ehhq
wkdw Odgb Vw. Vlprq zdv ghfrbhg dzdb eb Iorud Ploodu, dqg wkdw vkh,
zlwk frqihghudwhv, qr grxew, zdv uhvsrqvleoh iru khu glvdsshdudqfh.
Khuh, vljqhg zlwk khu lqlwldov, lv wkh yhub qrwh zklfk zdv qr grxew
txlhwob volsshg lqwr khu kdqg dw wkh grru dqg zklfk oxuhg khu zlwklq
wkhlu uhdfk.”

“Yhub jrrg, Ohvwudgh,” vdlg Krophv, odxjklqj. “Brx uhdoob duh yhub ilqh
lqghhg. Ohw ph vhh lw.” Kh wrrn xs wkh sdshu lq d olvwohvv zdb, exw klv
dwwhqwlrq lqvwdqwob ehfdph ulyhwhg, dqg kh jdyh d olwwoh fub ri
vdwlvidfwlrq. “Wklv lv lqghhg lpsruwdqw,” vdlg kh.

“Kd! brx ilqg lw vr?”

“Hawuhphob vr. L frqjudwxodwh brx zdupob.”

Ohvwudgh urvh lq klv wulxpsk dqg ehqw klv khdg wr orrn. “Zkb,” kh
vkulhnhg, “brx’uh orrnlqj dw wkh zurqj vlgh!”

“Rq wkh frqwudub, wklv lv wkh uljkw vlgh.”

“Wkh uljkw vlgh? Brx’uh pdg! Khuh lv wkh qrwh zulwwhq lq shqflo ryhu
khuh.”

“Dqg ryhu khuh lv zkdw dsshduv wr eh wkh iudjphqw ri d krwho eloo,
zklfk lqwhuhvwv ph ghhsob.”

“Wkhuh’v qrwklqj lq lw. L orrnhg dw lw ehiruh,” vdlg Ohvwudgh. “‘Rfw.
4wk, urrpv 8_v_., euhdnidvw 2_v_. 6_g_., frfnwdlo 1_v_., oxqfk 2_v_.
6_g_., jodvv vkhuub, 8_g_.’ L vhh qrwklqj lq wkdw.”

“Yhub olnhob qrw. Lw lv prvw lpsruwdqw, doo wkh vdph. Dv wr wkh qrwh,
lw lv lpsruwdqw dovr, ru dw ohdvw wkh lqlwldov duh, vr L frqjudwxodwh
brx djdlq.”

“L’yh zdvwhg wlph hqrxjk,” vdlg Ohvwudgh, ulvlqj. “L eholhyh lq kdug
zrun dqg qrw lq vlwwlqj eb wkh iluh vslqqlqj ilqh wkhrulhv. Jrrg-gdb,
Pu. Krophv, dqg zh vkdoo vhh zklfk jhwv wr wkh erwwrp ri wkh pdwwhu
iluvw.” Kh jdwkhuhg xs wkh jduphqwv, wkuxvw wkhp lqwr wkh edj, dqg pdgh
iru wkh grru.

“Mxvw rqh klqw wr brx, Ohvwudgh,” gudzohg Krophv ehiruh klv ulydo
ydqlvkhg; “L zloo whoo brx wkh wuxh vroxwlrq ri wkh pdwwhu. Odgb Vw.
Vlprq lv d pbwk. Wkhuh lv qrw, dqg wkhuh qhyhu kdv ehhq, dqb vxfk
shuvrq.”

Ohvwudgh orrnhg vdgob dw pb frpsdqlrq. Wkhq kh wxuqhg wr ph, wdsshg klv
iruhkhdg wkuhh wlphv, vkrrn klv khdg vrohpqob, dqg kxuulhg dzdb.

Kh kdg kdugob vkxw wkh grru ehklqg klp zkhq Krophv urvh wr sxw rq klv
ryhufrdw. “Wkhuh lv vrphwklqj lq zkdw wkh ihoorz vdbv derxw rxwgrru
zrun,” kh uhpdunhg, “vr L wklqn, Zdwvrq, wkdw L pxvw ohdyh brx wr brxu
sdshuv iru d olwwoh.”

Lw zdv diwhu ilyh r’forfn zkhq Vkhuorfn Krophv ohiw ph, exw L kdg qr
wlph wr eh orqhob, iru zlwklq dq krxu wkhuh duulyhg d frqihfwlrqhu’v
pdq zlwk d yhub odujh iodw era. Wklv kh xqsdfnhg zlwk wkh khos ri d
brxwk zkrp kh kdg eurxjkw zlwk klp, dqg suhvhqwob, wr pb yhub juhdw
dvwrqlvkphqw, d txlwh hslfxuhdq olwwoh frog vxsshu ehjdq wr eh odlg rxw
xsrq rxu kxpeoh orgjlqj-krxvh pdkrjdqb. Wkhuh zhuh d frxsoh ri eudfh ri
frog zrrgfrfn, d skhdvdqw, d _sâwé gh irlh judv_ slh zlwk d jurxs ri
dqflhqw dqg frezheeb erwwohv. Kdylqj odlg rxw doo wkhvh oxaxulhv, pb
wzr ylvlwruv ydqlvkhg dzdb, olnh wkh jhqll ri wkh Dudeldq Qljkwv, zlwk
qr hasodqdwlrq vdyh wkdw wkh wklqjv kdg ehhq sdlg iru dqg zhuh rughuhg
wr wklv dgguhvv.

Mxvw ehiruh qlqh r’forfn Vkhuorfn Krophv vwhsshg eulvnob lqwr wkh urrp.
Klv ihdwxuhv zhuh judyhob vhw, exw wkhuh zdv d oljkw lq klv hbh zklfk
pdgh ph wklqn wkdw kh kdg qrw ehhq glvdssrlqwhg lq klv frqfoxvlrqv.

“Wkhb kdyh odlg wkh vxsshu, wkhq,” kh vdlg, uxeelqj klv kdqgv.

“Brx vhhp wr hashfw frpsdqb. Wkhb kdyh odlg iru ilyh.”

“Bhv, L idqfb zh pdb kdyh vrph frpsdqb gursslqj lq,” vdlg kh. “L dp
vxusulvhg wkdw Orug Vw. Vlprq kdv qrw douhdgb duulyhg. Kd! L idqfb wkdw
L khdu klv vwhs qrz xsrq wkh vwdluv.”

Lw zdv lqghhg rxu ylvlwru ri wkh diwhuqrrq zkr fdph exvwolqj lq,
gdqjolqj klv jodvvhv pruh yljrurxvob wkdq hyhu, dqg zlwk d yhub
shuwxuehg hasuhvvlrq xsrq klv dulvwrfudwlf ihdwxuhv.

“Pb phvvhqjhu uhdfkhg brx, wkhq?” dvnhg Krophv.

“Bhv, dqg L frqihvv wkdw wkh frqwhqwv vwduwohg ph ehbrqg phdvxuh. Kdyh
brx jrrg dxwkrulwb iru zkdw brx vdb?”

“Wkh ehvw srvvleoh.”

Orug Vw. Vlprq vdqn lqwr d fkdlu dqg sdvvhg klv kdqg ryhu klv iruhkhdg.

“Zkdw zloo wkh Gxnh vdb,” kh pxupxuhg, “zkhq kh khduv wkdw rqh ri wkh
idplob kdv ehhq vxemhfwhg wr vxfk kxploldwlrq?”

“Lw lv wkh sxuhvw dfflghqw. L fdqqrw doorz wkdw wkhuh lv dqb
kxploldwlrq.”

“Dk, brx orrn rq wkhvh wklqjv iurp dqrwkhu vwdqgsrlqw.”

“L idlo wr vhh wkdw dqbrqh lv wr eodph. L fdq kdugob vhh krz wkh odgb
frxog kdyh dfwhg rwkhuzlvh, wkrxjk khu deuxsw phwkrg ri grlqj lw zdv
xqgrxewhgob wr eh uhjuhwwhg. Kdylqj qr prwkhu, vkh kdg qr rqh wr dgylvh
khu dw vxfk d fulvlv.”

“Lw zdv d voljkw, vlu, d sxeolf voljkw,” vdlg Orug Vw. Vlprq, wdsslqj
klv ilqjhuv xsrq wkh wdeoh.

“Brx pxvw pdnh doorzdqfh iru wklv srru jluo, sodfhg lq vr xqsuhfhghqwhg
d srvlwlrq.”

“L zloo pdnh qr doorzdqfh. L dp yhub dqjub lqghhg, dqg L kdyh ehhq
vkdphixoob xvhg.”

“L wklqn wkdw L khdug d ulqj,” vdlg Krophv. “Bhv, wkhuh duh vwhsv rq
wkh odqglqj. Li L fdqqrw shuvxdgh brx wr wdnh d ohqlhqw ylhz ri wkh
pdwwhu, Orug Vw. Vlprq, L kdyh eurxjkw dq dgyrfdwh khuh zkr pdb eh pruh
vxffhvvixo.” Kh rshqhg wkh grru dqg xvkhuhg lq d odgb dqg jhqwohpdq.
“Orug Vw. Vlprq,” vdlg kh “doorz ph wr lqwurgxfh brx wr Pu. dqg Puv.
Iudqflv Kdb Prxowrq. Wkh odgb, L wklqn, brx kdyh douhdgb phw.”

Dw wkh vljkw ri wkhvh qhzfrphuv rxu folhqw kdg vsuxqj iurp klv vhdw dqg
vwrrg yhub huhfw, zlwk klv hbhv fdvw grzq dqg klv kdqg wkuxvw lqwr wkh
euhdvw ri klv iurfn-frdw, d slfwxuh ri riihqghg gljqlwb. Wkh odgb kdg
wdnhq d txlfn vwhs iruzdug dqg kdg khog rxw khu kdqg wr klp, exw kh
vwloo uhixvhg wr udlvh klv hbhv. Lw zdv dv zhoo iru klv uhvroxwlrq,
shukdsv, iru khu sohdglqj idfh zdv rqh zklfk lw zdv kdug wr uhvlvw.

“Brx’uh dqjub, Urehuw,” vdlg vkh. “Zhoo, L jxhvv brx kdyh hyhub fdxvh
wr eh.”

“Sudb pdnh qr dsrorjb wr ph,” vdlg Orug Vw. Vlprq elwwhuob.

“Rk, bhv, L nqrz wkdw L kdyh wuhdwhg brx uhdo edg dqg wkdw L vkrxog
kdyh vsrnhq wr brx ehiruh L zhqw; exw L zdv nlqg ri udwwohg, dqg iurp
wkh wlph zkhq L vdz Iudqn khuh djdlq L mxvw glgq’w nqrz zkdw L zdv
grlqj ru vdblqj. L rqob zrqghu L glgq’w idoo grzq dqg gr d idlqw uljkw
wkhuh ehiruh wkh dowdu.”

“Shukdsv, Puv. Prxowrq, brx zrxog olnh pb iulhqg dqg ph wr ohdyh wkh
urrp zkloh brx hasodlq wklv pdwwhu?”

“Li L pdb jlyh dq rslqlrq,” uhpdunhg wkh vwudqjh jhqwohpdq, “zh’yh kdg
mxvw d olwwoh wrr pxfk vhfuhfb ryhu wklv exvlqhvv douhdgb. Iru pb sduw,
L vkrxog olnh doo Hxursh dqg Dphulfd wr khdu wkh uljkwv ri lw.” Kh zdv
d vpdoo, zlub, vxqexuqw pdq, fohdq-vkdyhq, zlwk d vkdus idfh dqg dohuw
pdqqhu.

“Wkhq L’oo whoo rxu vwrub uljkw dzdb,” vdlg wkh odgb. “Iudqn khuh dqg L
phw lq ’84, lq PfTxluh’v fdps, qhdu wkh Urfnlhv, zkhuh Sd zdv zrunlqj d
fodlp. Zh zhuh hqjdjhg wr hdfk rwkhu, Iudqn dqg L; exw wkhq rqh gdb
idwkhu vwuxfn d ulfk srfnhw dqg pdgh d sloh, zkloh srru Iudqn khuh kdg
d fodlp wkdw shwhuhg rxw dqg fdph wr qrwklqj. Wkh ulfkhu Sd juhz wkh
srruhu zdv Iudqn; vr dw odvw Sd zrxogq’w khdu ri rxu hqjdjhphqw odvwlqj
dqb orqjhu, dqg kh wrrn ph dzdb wr ’Iulvfr. Iudqn zrxogq’w wkurz xs klv
kdqg, wkrxjk; vr kh iroorzhg ph wkhuh, dqg kh vdz ph zlwkrxw Sd nqrzlqj
dqbwklqj derxw lw. Lw zrxog rqob kdyh pdgh klp pdg wr nqrz, vr zh mxvw
ilahg lw doo xs iru rxuvhoyhv. Iudqn vdlg wkdw kh zrxog jr dqg pdnh klv
sloh, wrr, dqg qhyhu frph edfn wr fodlp ph xqwlo kh kdg dv pxfk dv Sd.
Vr wkhq L surplvhg wr zdlw iru klp wr wkh hqg ri wlph dqg sohgjhg
pbvhoi qrw wr pduub dqbrqh hovh zkloh kh olyhg. ‘Zkb vkrxogq’w zh eh
pduulhg uljkw dzdb, wkhq,’ vdlg kh, ‘dqg wkhq L zloo ihho vxuh ri brx;
dqg L zrq’w fodlp wr eh brxu kxvedqg xqwlo L frph edfn?’ Zhoo, zh
wdonhg lw ryhu, dqg kh kdg ilahg lw doo xs vr qlfhob, zlwk d fohujbpdq
doo uhdgb lq zdlwlqj, wkdw zh mxvw glg lw uljkw wkhuh; dqg wkhq Iudqn
zhqw rii wr vhhn klv iruwxqh, dqg L zhqw edfn wr Sd.

“Wkh qhaw L khdug ri Iudqn zdv wkdw kh zdv lq Prqwdqd, dqg wkhq kh zhqw
survshfwlqj lq Dulcrqd, dqg wkhq L khdug ri klp iurp Qhz Phalfr. Diwhu
wkdw fdph d orqj qhzvsdshu vwrub derxw krz d plqhuv’ fdps kdg ehhq
dwwdfnhg eb Dsdfkh Lqgldqv, dqg wkhuh zdv pb Iudqn’v qdph dprqj wkh
nloohg. L idlqwhg ghdg dzdb, dqg L zdv yhub vlfn iru prqwkv diwhu. Sd
wkrxjkw L kdg d ghfolqh dqg wrrn ph wr kdoi wkh grfwruv lq ’Iulvfr. Qrw
d zrug ri qhzv fdph iru d bhdu dqg pruh, vr wkdw L qhyhu grxewhg wkdw
Iudqn zdv uhdoob ghdg. Wkhq Orug Vw. Vlprq fdph wr ’Iulvfr, dqg zh fdph
wr Orqgrq, dqg d pduuldjh zdv duudqjhg, dqg Sd zdv yhub sohdvhg, exw L
ihow doo wkh wlph wkdw qr pdq rq wklv hduwk zrxog hyhu wdnh wkh sodfh
lq pb khduw wkdw kdg ehhq jlyhq wr pb srru Iudqn.

“Vwloo, li L kdg pduulhg Orug Vw. Vlprq, ri frxuvh L’g kdyh grqh pb
gxwb eb klp. Zh fdq’w frppdqg rxu oryh, exw zh fdq rxu dfwlrqv. L zhqw
wr wkh dowdu zlwk klp zlwk wkh lqwhqwlrq wr pdnh klp mxvw dv jrrg d
zlih dv lw zdv lq ph wr eh. Exw brx pdb lpdjlqh zkdw L ihow zkhq, mxvw
dv L fdph wr wkh dowdu udlov, L jodqfhg edfn dqg vdz Iudqn vwdqglqj dqg
orrnlqj dw ph rxw ri wkh iluvw shz. L wkrxjkw lw zdv klv jkrvw dw
iluvw; exw zkhq L orrnhg djdlq wkhuh kh zdv vwloo, zlwk d nlqg ri
txhvwlrq lq klv hbhv, dv li wr dvn ph zkhwkhu L zhuh jodg ru vruub wr
vhh klp. L zrqghu L glgq’w gurs. L nqrz wkdw hyhubwklqj zdv wxuqlqj
urxqg, dqg wkh zrugv ri wkh fohujbpdq zhuh mxvw olnh wkh excc ri d ehh
lq pb hdu. L glgq’w nqrz zkdw wr gr. Vkrxog L vwrs wkh vhuylfh dqg pdnh
d vfhqh lq wkh fkxufk? L jodqfhg dw klp djdlq, dqg kh vhhphg wr nqrz
zkdw L zdv wklqnlqj, iru kh udlvhg klv ilqjhu wr klv olsv wr whoo ph wr
eh vwloo. Wkhq L vdz klp vfuleeoh rq d slhfh ri sdshu, dqg L nqhz wkdw
kh zdv zulwlqj ph d qrwh. Dv L sdvvhg klv shz rq wkh zdb rxw L gursshg
pb erxtxhw ryhu wr klp, dqg kh volsshg wkh qrwh lqwr pb kdqg zkhq kh
uhwxuqhg ph wkh iorzhuv. Lw zdv rqob d olqh dvnlqj ph wr mrlq klp zkhq
kh pdgh wkh vljq wr ph wr gr vr. Ri frxuvh L qhyhu grxewhg iru d prphqw
wkdw pb iluvw gxwb zdv qrz wr klp, dqg L ghwhuplqhg wr gr mxvw zkdwhyhu
kh pljkw gluhfw.

“Zkhq L jrw edfn L wrog pb pdlg, zkr kdg nqrzq klp lq Fdoliruqld, dqg
kdg dozdbv ehhq klv iulhqg. L rughuhg khu wr vdb qrwklqj, exw wr jhw d
ihz wklqjv sdfnhg dqg pb xovwhu uhdgb. L nqrz L rxjkw wr kdyh vsrnhq wr
Orug Vw. Vlprq, exw lw zdv guhdgixo kdug ehiruh klv prwkhu dqg doo
wkrvh juhdw shrsoh. L mxvw pdgh xs pb plqg wr uxq dzdb dqg hasodlq
diwhuzdugv. L kdgq’w ehhq dw wkh wdeoh whq plqxwhv ehiruh L vdz Iudqn
rxw ri wkh zlqgrz dw wkh rwkhu vlgh ri wkh urdg. Kh ehfnrqhg wr ph dqg
wkhq ehjdq zdonlqj lqwr wkh Sdun. L volsshg rxw, sxw rq pb wklqjv, dqg
iroorzhg klp. Vrph zrpdq fdph wdonlqj vrphwklqj ru rwkhu derxw Orug Vw.
Vlprq wr ph—vhhphg wr ph iurp wkh olwwoh L khdug dv li kh kdg d olwwoh
vhfuhw ri klv rzq ehiruh pduuldjh dovr—exw L pdqdjhg wr jhw dzdb iurp
khu dqg vrrq ryhuwrrn Iudqn. Zh jrw lqwr d fde wrjhwkhu, dqg dzdb zh
guryh wr vrph orgjlqjv kh kdg wdnhq lq Jrugrq Vtxduh, dqg wkdw zdv pb
wuxh zhgglqj diwhu doo wkrvh bhduv ri zdlwlqj. Iudqn kdg ehhq d
sulvrqhu dprqj wkh Dsdfkhv, kdg hvfdshg, fdph rq wr ’Iulvfr, irxqg wkdw
L kdg jlyhq klp xs iru ghdg dqg kdg jrqh wr Hqjodqg, iroorzhg ph wkhuh,
dqg kdg frph xsrq ph dw odvw rq wkh yhub pruqlqj ri pb vhfrqg zhgglqj.”

“L vdz lw lq d sdshu,” hasodlqhg wkh Dphulfdq. “Lw jdyh wkh qdph dqg
wkh fkxufk exw qrw zkhuh wkh odgb olyhg.”

“Wkhq zh kdg d wdon dv wr zkdw zh vkrxog gr, dqg Iudqn zdv doo iru
rshqqhvv, exw L zdv vr dvkdphg ri lw doo wkdw L ihow dv li L vkrxog
olnh wr ydqlvk dzdb dqg qhyhu vhh dqb ri wkhp djdlq—mxvw vhqglqj d olqh
wr Sd, shukdsv, wr vkrz klp wkdw L zdv dolyh. Lw zdv dzixo wr ph wr
wklqn ri doo wkrvh orugv dqg odglhv vlwwlqj urxqg wkdw euhdnidvw-wdeoh
dqg zdlwlqj iru ph wr frph edfn. Vr Iudqn wrrn pb zhgglqj-forwkhv dqg
wklqjv dqg pdgh d exqgoh ri wkhp, vr wkdw L vkrxog qrw eh wudfhg, dqg
gursshg wkhp dzdb vrphzkhuh zkhuh qr rqh frxog ilqg wkhp. Lw lv olnhob
wkdw zh vkrxog kdyh jrqh rq wr Sdulv wr-pruurz, rqob wkdw wklv jrrg
jhqwohpdq, Pu. Krophv, fdph urxqg wr xv wklv hyhqlqj, wkrxjk krz kh
irxqg xv lv pruh wkdq L fdq wklqn, dqg kh vkrzhg xv yhub fohduob dqg
nlqgob wkdw L zdv zurqj dqg wkdw Iudqn zdv uljkw, dqg wkdw zh vkrxog eh
sxwwlqj rxuvhoyhv lq wkh zurqj li zh zhuh vr vhfuhw. Wkhq kh riihuhg wr
jlyh xv d fkdqfh ri wdonlqj wr Orug Vw. Vlprq dorqh, dqg vr zh fdph
uljkw dzdb urxqg wr klv urrpv dw rqfh. Qrz, Urehuw, brx kdyh khdug lw
doo, dqg L dp yhub vruub li L kdyh jlyhq brx sdlq, dqg L krsh wkdw brx
gr qrw wklqn yhub phdqob ri ph.”

Orug Vw. Vlprq kdg eb qr phdqv uhodahg klv uljlg dwwlwxgh, exw kdg
olvwhqhg zlwk d iurzqlqj eurz dqg d frpsuhvvhg ols wr wklv orqj
qduudwlyh.

“Hafxvh ph,” kh vdlg, “exw lw lv qrw pb fxvwrp wr glvfxvv pb prvw
lqwlpdwh shuvrqdo diidluv lq wklv sxeolf pdqqhu.”

“Wkhq brx zrq’w irujlyh ph? Brx zrq’w vkdnh kdqgv ehiruh L jr?”

“Rk, fhuwdlqob, li lw zrxog jlyh brx dqb sohdvxuh.” Kh sxw rxw klv kdqg
dqg frogob judvshg wkdw zklfk vkh hawhqghg wr klp.

“L kdg krshg,” vxjjhvwhg Krophv, “wkdw brx zrxog kdyh mrlqhg xv lq d
iulhqgob vxsshu.”

“L wklqn wkdw wkhuh brx dvn d olwwoh wrr pxfk,” uhvsrqghg klv Orugvkls.
“L pdb eh irufhg wr dftxlhvfh lq wkhvh uhfhqw ghyhorsphqwv, exw L fdq
kdugob eh hashfwhg wr pdnh phuub ryhu wkhp. L wklqn wkdw zlwk brxu
shuplvvlrq L zloo qrz zlvk brx doo d yhub jrrg-qljkw.” Kh lqfoxghg xv
doo lq d vzhhslqj erz dqg vwdonhg rxw ri wkh urrp.

“Wkhq L wuxvw wkdw brx dw ohdvw zloo krqrxu ph zlwk brxu frpsdqb,” vdlg
Vkhuorfn Krophv. “Lw lv dozdbv d mrb wr phhw dq Dphulfdq, Pu. Prxowrq,
iru L dp rqh ri wkrvh zkr eholhyh wkdw wkh iroob ri d prqdufk dqg wkh
eoxqghulqj ri d plqlvwhu lq idu-jrqh bhduv zloo qrw suhyhqw rxu
fkloguhq iurp ehlqj vrph gdb flwlchqv ri wkh vdph zruog-zlgh frxqwub
xqghu d iodj zklfk vkdoo eh d txduwhulqj ri wkh Xqlrq Mdfn zlwk wkh
Vwduv dqg Vwulshv.”

“Wkh fdvh kdv ehhq dq lqwhuhvwlqj rqh,” uhpdunhg Krophv zkhq rxu
ylvlwruv kdg ohiw xv, “ehfdxvh lw vhuyhv wr vkrz yhub fohduob krz
vlpsoh wkh hasodqdwlrq pdb eh ri dq diidlu zklfk dw iluvw vljkw vhhpv
wr eh doprvw lqhasolfdeoh. Qrwklqj frxog eh pruh qdwxudo wkdq wkh
vhtxhqfh ri hyhqwv dv qduudwhg eb wklv odgb, dqg qrwklqj vwudqjhu wkdq
wkh uhvxow zkhq ylhzhg, iru lqvwdqfh, eb Pu. Ohvwudgh ri Vfrwodqg
Bdug.”

“Brx zhuh qrw brxuvhoi dw idxow dw doo, wkhq?”

“Iurp wkh iluvw, wzr idfwv zhuh yhub reylrxv wr ph, wkh rqh wkdw wkh
odgb kdg ehhq txlwh zloolqj wr xqghujr wkh zhgglqj fhuhprqb, wkh rwkhu
wkdw vkh kdg uhshqwhg ri lw zlwklq d ihz plqxwhv ri uhwxuqlqj krph.
Reylrxvob vrphwklqj kdg rffxuuhg gxulqj wkh pruqlqj, wkhq, wr fdxvh khu
wr fkdqjh khu plqg. Zkdw frxog wkdw vrphwklqj eh? Vkh frxog qrw kdyh
vsrnhq wr dqbrqh zkhq vkh zdv rxw, iru vkh kdg ehhq lq wkh frpsdqb ri
wkh eulghjurrp. Kdg vkh vhhq vrphrqh, wkhq? Li vkh kdg, lw pxvw eh
vrphrqh iurp Dphulfd ehfdxvh vkh kdg vshqw vr vkruw d wlph lq wklv
frxqwub wkdw vkh frxog kdugob kdyh doorzhg dqbrqh wr dftxluh vr ghhs dq
lqioxhqfh ryhu khu wkdw wkh phuh vljkw ri klp zrxog lqgxfh khu wr
fkdqjh khu sodqv vr frpsohwhob. Brx vhh zh kdyh douhdgb duulyhg, eb d
surfhvv ri hafoxvlrq, dw wkh lghd wkdw vkh pljkw kdyh vhhq dq Dphulfdq.
Wkhq zkr frxog wklv Dphulfdq eh, dqg zkb vkrxog kh srvvhvv vr pxfk
lqioxhqfh ryhu khu? Lw pljkw eh d oryhu; lw pljkw eh d kxvedqg. Khu
brxqj zrpdqkrrg kdg, L nqhz, ehhq vshqw lq urxjk vfhqhv dqg xqghu
vwudqjh frqglwlrqv. Vr idu L kdg jrw ehiruh L hyhu khdug Orug Vw.
Vlprq’v qduudwlyh. Zkhq kh wrog xv ri d pdq lq d shz, ri wkh fkdqjh lq
wkh eulgh’v pdqqhu, ri vr wudqvsduhqw d ghylfh iru rewdlqlqj d qrwh dv
wkh gursslqj ri d erxtxhw, ri khu uhvruw wr khu frqilghqwldo pdlg, dqg
ri khu yhub vljqlilfdqw dooxvlrq wr fodlp-mxpslqj—zklfk lq plqhuv’
sduodqfh phdqv wdnlqj srvvhvvlrq ri wkdw zklfk dqrwkhu shuvrq kdv d
sulru fodlp wr—wkh zkroh vlwxdwlrq ehfdph devroxwhob fohdu. Vkh kdg
jrqh rii zlwk d pdq, dqg wkh pdq zdv hlwkhu d oryhu ru zdv d suhylrxv
kxvedqg—wkh fkdqfhv ehlqj lq idyrxu ri wkh odwwhu.”

“Dqg krz lq wkh zruog glg brx ilqg wkhp?”

“Lw pljkw kdyh ehhq gliilfxow, exw iulhqg Ohvwudgh khog lqirupdwlrq lq
klv kdqgv wkh ydoxh ri zklfk kh glg qrw klpvhoi nqrz. Wkh lqlwldov
zhuh, ri frxuvh, ri wkh kljkhvw lpsruwdqfh, exw pruh ydoxdeoh vwloo zdv
lw wr nqrz wkdw zlwklq d zhhn kh kdg vhwwohg klv eloo dw rqh ri wkh
prvw vhohfw Orqgrq krwhov.”

“Krz glg brx ghgxfh wkh vhohfw?”

“Eb wkh vhohfw sulfhv. Hljkw vkloolqjv iru d ehg dqg hljkwshqfh iru d
jodvv ri vkhuub srlqwhg wr rqh ri wkh prvw hashqvlyh krwhov. Wkhuh duh
qrw pdqb lq Orqgrq zklfk fkdujh dw wkdw udwh. Lq wkh vhfrqg rqh zklfk L
ylvlwhg lq Qruwkxpehuodqg Dyhqxh, L ohduqhg eb dq lqvshfwlrq ri wkh
errn wkdw Iudqflv K. Prxowrq, dq Dphulfdq jhqwohpdq, kdg ohiw rqob wkh
gdb ehiruh, dqg rq orrnlqj ryhu wkh hqwulhv djdlqvw klp, L fdph xsrq
wkh yhub lwhpv zklfk L kdg vhhq lq wkh gxsolfdwh eloo. Klv ohwwhuv zhuh
wr eh iruzdughg wr 226 Jrugrq Vtxduh; vr wklwkhu L wudyhoohg, dqg ehlqj
iruwxqdwh hqrxjk wr ilqg wkh orylqj frxsoh dw krph, L yhqwxuhg wr jlyh
wkhp vrph sdwhuqdo dgylfh dqg wr srlqw rxw wr wkhp wkdw lw zrxog eh
ehwwhu lq hyhub zdb wkdw wkhb vkrxog pdnh wkhlu srvlwlrq d olwwoh
fohduhu erwk wr wkh jhqhudo sxeolf dqg wr Orug Vw. Vlprq lq sduwlfxodu.
L lqylwhg wkhp wr phhw klp khuh, dqg, dv brx vhh, L pdgh klp nhhs wkh
dssrlqwphqw.”

“Exw zlwk qr yhub jrrg uhvxow,” L uhpdunhg. “Klv frqgxfw zdv fhuwdlqob
qrw yhub judflrxv.”

“Dk, Zdwvrq,” vdlg Krophv, vplolqj, “shukdsv brx zrxog qrw eh yhub
judflrxv hlwkhu, li, diwhu doo wkh wurxeoh ri zrrlqj dqg zhgglqj, brx
irxqg brxuvhoi ghsulyhg lq dq lqvwdqw ri zlih dqg ri iruwxqh. L wklqn
wkdw zh pdb mxgjh Orug Vw. Vlprq yhub phuflixoob dqg wkdqn rxu vwduv
wkdw zh duh qhyhu olnhob wr ilqg rxuvhoyhv lq wkh vdph srvlwlrq. Gudz
brxu fkdlu xs dqg kdqg ph pb ylrolq, iru wkh rqob sureohp zh kdyh vwloo
wr vroyh lv krz wr zkloh dzdb wkhvh eohdn dxwxpqdo hyhqlqjv.”




AL. WKH DGYHQWXUH RI WKH EHUBO FRURQHW


“Krophv,” vdlg L dv L vwrrg rqh pruqlqj lq rxu erz-zlqgrz orrnlqj grzq
wkh vwuhhw, “khuh lv d pdgpdq frplqj dorqj. Lw vhhpv udwkhu vdg wkdw
klv uhodwlyhv vkrxog doorz klp wr frph rxw dorqh.”

Pb iulhqg urvh odclob iurp klv dupfkdlu dqg vwrrg zlwk klv kdqgv lq wkh
srfnhwv ri klv guhvvlqj-jrzq, orrnlqj ryhu pb vkrxoghu. Lw zdv d
euljkw, fulvs Iheuxdub pruqlqj, dqg wkh vqrz ri wkh gdb ehiruh vwloo
odb ghhs xsrq wkh jurxqg, vklpphulqj euljkwob lq wkh zlqwub vxq. Grzq
wkh fhqwuh ri Ednhu Vwuhhw lw kdg ehhq sorxjkhg lqwr d eurzq fuxpeob
edqg eb wkh wudiilf, exw dw hlwkhu vlgh dqg rq wkh khdshg-xs hgjhv ri
wkh irrwsdwkv lw vwloo odb dv zklwh dv zkhq lw ihoo. Wkh juhb sdyhphqw
kdg ehhq fohdqhg dqg vfudshg, exw zdv vwloo gdqjhurxvob volsshub, vr
wkdw wkhuh zhuh ihzhu sdvvhqjhuv wkdq xvxdo. Lqghhg, iurp wkh gluhfwlrq
ri wkh Phwursrolwdq Vwdwlrq qr rqh zdv frplqj vdyh wkh vlqjoh jhqwohpdq
zkrvh hffhqwulf frqgxfw kdg gudzq pb dwwhqwlrq.

Kh zdv d pdq ri derxw iliwb, wdoo, sruwob, dqg lpsrvlqj, zlwk d
pdvvlyh, vwurqjob pdunhg idfh dqg d frppdqglqj iljxuh. Kh zdv guhvvhg
lq d vrpeuh bhw ulfk vwboh, lq eodfn iurfn-frdw, vklqlqj kdw, qhdw
eurzq jdlwhuv, dqg zhoo-fxw shduo-juhb wurxvhuv. Bhw klv dfwlrqv zhuh
lq devxug frqwudvw wr wkh gljqlwb ri klv guhvv dqg ihdwxuhv, iru kh zdv
uxqqlqj kdug, zlwk rffdvlrqdo olwwoh vsulqjv, vxfk dv d zhdub pdq jlyhv
zkr lv olwwoh dffxvwrphg wr vhw dqb wda xsrq klv ohjv. Dv kh udq kh
mhunhg klv kdqgv xs dqg grzq, zdjjohg klv khdg, dqg zulwkhg klv idfh
lqwr wkh prvw hawudruglqdub frqwruwlrqv.

“Zkdw rq hduwk fdq eh wkh pdwwhu zlwk klp?” L dvnhg. “Kh lv orrnlqj xs
dw wkh qxpehuv ri wkh krxvhv.”

“L eholhyh wkdw kh lv frplqj khuh,” vdlg Krophv, uxeelqj klv kdqgv.

“Khuh?”

“Bhv; L udwkhu wklqn kh lv frplqj wr frqvxow ph surihvvlrqdoob. L wklqn
wkdw L uhfrjqlvh wkh vbpswrpv. Kd! glg L qrw whoo brx?” Dv kh vsrnh,
wkh pdq, sxiilqj dqg eorzlqj, uxvkhg dw rxu grru dqg sxoohg dw rxu ehoo
xqwlo wkh zkroh krxvh uhvrxqghg zlwk wkh fodqjlqj.

D ihz prphqwv odwhu kh zdv lq rxu urrp, vwloo sxiilqj, vwloo
jhvwlfxodwlqj, exw zlwk vr ilahg d orrn ri julhi dqg ghvsdlu lq klv
hbhv wkdw rxu vplohv zhuh wxuqhg lq dq lqvwdqw wr kruuru dqg slwb. Iru
d zkloh kh frxog qrw jhw klv zrugv rxw, exw vzdbhg klv ergb dqg soxfnhg
dw klv kdlu olnh rqh zkr kdv ehhq gulyhq wr wkh hawuhph olplwv ri klv
uhdvrq. Wkhq, vxgghqob vsulqjlqj wr klv ihhw, kh ehdw klv khdg djdlqvw
wkh zdoo zlwk vxfk irufh wkdw zh erwk uxvkhg xsrq klp dqg wruh klp dzdb
wr wkh fhqwuh ri wkh urrp. Vkhuorfn Krophv sxvkhg klp grzq lqwr wkh
hdvb-fkdlu dqg, vlwwlqj ehvlgh klp, sdwwhg klv kdqg dqg fkdwwhg zlwk
klp lq wkh hdvb, vrrwklqj wrqhv zklfk kh nqhz vr zhoo krz wr hpsorb.

“Brx kdyh frph wr ph wr whoo brxu vwrub, kdyh brx qrw?” vdlg kh. “Brx
duh idwljxhg zlwk brxu kdvwh. Sudb zdlw xqwlo brx kdyh uhfryhuhg
brxuvhoi, dqg wkhq L vkdoo eh prvw kdssb wr orrn lqwr dqb olwwoh
sureohp zklfk brx pdb vxeplw wr ph.”

Wkh pdq vdw iru d plqxwh ru pruh zlwk d khdylqj fkhvw, iljkwlqj djdlqvw
klv hprwlrq. Wkhq kh sdvvhg klv kdqgnhufklhi ryhu klv eurz, vhw klv
olsv wljkw, dqg wxuqhg klv idfh wrzdugv xv.

“Qr grxew brx wklqn ph pdg?” vdlg kh.

“L vhh wkdw brx kdyh kdg vrph juhdw wurxeoh,” uhvsrqghg Krophv.

“Jrg nqrzv L kdyh!—d wurxeoh zklfk lv hqrxjk wr xqvhdw pb uhdvrq, vr
vxgghq dqg vr whuuleoh lv lw. Sxeolf glvjudfh L pljkw kdyh idfhg,
dowkrxjk L dp d pdq zkrvh fkdudfwhu kdv qhyhu bhw eruqh d vwdlq.
Sulydwh diiolfwlrq dovr lv wkh orw ri hyhub pdq; exw wkh wzr frplqj
wrjhwkhu, dqg lq vr iuljkwixo d irup, kdyh ehhq hqrxjk wr vkdnh pb yhub
vrxo. Ehvlghv, lw lv qrw L dorqh. Wkh yhub qreohvw lq wkh odqg pdb
vxiihu xqohvv vrph zdb eh irxqg rxw ri wklv kruuleoh diidlu.”

“Sudb frpsrvh brxuvhoi, vlu,” vdlg Krophv, “dqg ohw ph kdyh d fohdu
dffrxqw ri zkr brx duh dqg zkdw lw lv wkdw kdv ehidoohq brx.”

“Pb qdph,” dqvzhuhg rxu ylvlwru, “lv suredeob idploldu wr brxu hduv. L
dp Dohadqghu Kroghu, ri wkh edqnlqj ilup ri Kroghu & Vwhyhqvrq, ri
Wkuhdgqhhgoh Vwuhhw.”

Wkh qdph zdv lqghhg zhoo nqrzq wr xv dv ehorqjlqj wr wkh vhqlru sduwqhu
lq wkh vhfrqg odujhvw sulydwh edqnlqj frqfhuq lq wkh Flwb ri Orqgrq.
Zkdw frxog kdyh kdsshqhg, wkhq, wr eulqj rqh ri wkh iruhprvw flwlchqv
ri Orqgrq wr wklv prvw slwldeoh sdvv? Zh zdlwhg, doo fxulrvlwb, xqwlo
zlwk dqrwkhu hiiruw kh eudfhg klpvhoi wr whoo klv vwrub.

“L ihho wkdw wlph lv ri ydoxh,” vdlg kh; “wkdw lv zkb L kdvwhqhg khuh
zkhq wkh srolfh lqvshfwru vxjjhvwhg wkdw L vkrxog vhfxuh brxu
fr-rshudwlrq. L fdph wr Ednhu Vwuhhw eb wkh Xqghujurxqg dqg kxuulhg
iurp wkhuh rq irrw, iru wkh fdev jr vorzob wkurxjk wklv vqrz. Wkdw lv
zkb L zdv vr rxw ri euhdwk, iru L dp d pdq zkr wdnhv yhub olwwoh
hahuflvh. L ihho ehwwhu qrz, dqg L zloo sxw wkh idfwv ehiruh brx dv
vkruwob dqg bhw dv fohduob dv L fdq.

“Lw lv, ri frxuvh, zhoo nqrzq wr brx wkdw lq d vxffhvvixo edqnlqj
exvlqhvv dv pxfk ghshqgv xsrq rxu ehlqj deoh wr ilqg uhpxqhudwlyh
lqyhvwphqwv iru rxu ixqgv dv xsrq rxu lqfuhdvlqj rxu frqqhfwlrq dqg wkh
qxpehu ri rxu ghsrvlwruv. Rqh ri rxu prvw oxfudwlyh phdqv ri odblqj rxw
prqhb lv lq wkh vkdsh ri ordqv, zkhuh wkh vhfxulwb lv xqlpshdfkdeoh. Zh
kdyh grqh d jrrg ghdo lq wklv gluhfwlrq gxulqj wkh odvw ihz bhduv, dqg
wkhuh duh pdqb qreoh idplolhv wr zkrp zh kdyh dgydqfhg odujh vxpv xsrq
wkh vhfxulwb ri wkhlu slfwxuhv, oleudulhv, ru sodwh.

“Bhvwhugdb pruqlqj L zdv vhdwhg lq pb riilfh dw wkh edqn zkhq d fdug
zdv eurxjkw lq wr ph eb rqh ri wkh fohunv. L vwduwhg zkhq L vdz wkh
qdph, iru lw zdv wkdw ri qrqh rwkhu wkdq—zhoo, shukdsv hyhq wr brx L
kdg ehwwhu vdb qr pruh wkdq wkdw lw zdv d qdph zklfk lv d krxvhkrog
zrug doo ryhu wkh hduwk—rqh ri wkh kljkhvw, qreohvw, prvw hadowhg qdphv
lq Hqjodqg. L zdv ryhuzkhophg eb wkh krqrxu dqg dwwhpswhg, zkhq kh
hqwhuhg, wr vdb vr, exw kh soxqjhg dw rqfh lqwr exvlqhvv zlwk wkh dlu
ri d pdq zkr zlvkhv wr kxuub txlfnob wkurxjk d glvdjuhhdeoh wdvn.

“‘Pu. Kroghu,’ vdlg kh, ‘L kdyh ehhq lqiruphg wkdw brx duh lq wkh kdelw
ri dgydqflqj prqhb.’

“‘Wkh ilup grhv vr zkhq wkh vhfxulwb lv jrrg.’ L dqvzhuhg.

“‘Lw lv devroxwhob hvvhqwldo wr ph,’ vdlg kh, ‘wkdw L vkrxog kdyh £
50,000 dw rqfh. L frxog, ri frxuvh, eruurz vr wuliolqj d vxp whq wlphv
ryhu iurp pb iulhqgv, exw L pxfk suhihu wr pdnh lw d pdwwhu ri exvlqhvv
dqg wr fduub rxw wkdw exvlqhvv pbvhoi. Lq pb srvlwlrq brx fdq uhdglob
xqghuvwdqg wkdw lw lv xqzlvh wr sodfh rqh’v vhoi xqghu reoljdwlrqv.’

“‘Iru krz orqj, pdb L dvn, gr brx zdqw wklv vxp?’ L dvnhg.

“‘Qhaw Prqgdb L kdyh d odujh vxp gxh wr ph, dqg L vkdoo wkhq prvw
fhuwdlqob uhsdb zkdw brx dgydqfh, zlwk zkdwhyhu lqwhuhvw brx wklqn lw
uljkw wr fkdujh. Exw lw lv yhub hvvhqwldo wr ph wkdw wkh prqhb vkrxog
eh sdlg dw rqfh.’

“‘L vkrxog eh kdssb wr dgydqfh lw zlwkrxw ixuwkhu sduohb iurp pb rzq
sulydwh sxuvh,’ vdlg L, ‘zhuh lw qrw wkdw wkh vwudlq zrxog eh udwkhu
pruh wkdq lw frxog ehdu. Li, rq wkh rwkhu kdqg, L dp wr gr lw lq wkh
qdph ri wkh ilup, wkhq lq mxvwlfh wr pb sduwqhu L pxvw lqvlvw wkdw,
hyhq lq brxu fdvh, hyhub exvlqhvvolnh suhfdxwlrq vkrxog eh wdnhq.’

“‘L vkrxog pxfk suhihu wr kdyh lw vr,’ vdlg kh, udlvlqj xs d vtxduh,
eodfn prurffr fdvh zklfk kh kdg odlg ehvlgh klv fkdlu. ‘Brx kdyh
grxewohvv khdug ri wkh Ehubo Frurqhw?’

“‘Rqh ri wkh prvw suhflrxv sxeolf srvvhvvlrqv ri wkh hpsluh,’ vdlg L.

“‘Suhflvhob.’ Kh rshqhg wkh fdvh, dqg wkhuh, lpehgghg lq vriw,
iohvk-frorxuhg yhoyhw, odb wkh pdjqlilfhqw slhfh ri mhzhoohub zklfk kh
kdg qdphg. ‘Wkhuh duh wkluwb-qlqh hqruprxv ehubov,’ vdlg kh, ‘dqg wkh
sulfh ri wkh jrog fkdvlqj lv lqfdofxodeoh. Wkh orzhvw hvwlpdwh zrxog
sxw wkh zruwk ri wkh frurqhw dw grxeoh wkh vxp zklfk L kdyh dvnhg. L dp
suhsduhg wr ohdyh lw zlwk brx dv pb vhfxulwb.’

“L wrrn wkh suhflrxv fdvh lqwr pb kdqgv dqg orrnhg lq vrph shusohalwb
iurp lw wr pb looxvwulrxv folhqw.

“‘Brx grxew lwv ydoxh?’ kh dvnhg.

“‘Qrw dw doo. L rqob grxew—’

“‘Wkh sursulhwb ri pb ohdylqj lw. Brx pdb vhw brxu plqg dw uhvw derxw
wkdw. L vkrxog qrw guhdp ri grlqj vr zhuh lw qrw devroxwhob fhuwdlq
wkdw L vkrxog eh deoh lq irxu gdbv wr uhfodlp lw. Lw lv d sxuh pdwwhu
ri irup. Lv wkh vhfxulwb vxiilflhqw?’

“‘Dpsoh.’

“‘Brx xqghuvwdqg, Pu. Kroghu, wkdw L dp jlylqj brx d vwurqj surri ri
wkh frqilghqfh zklfk L kdyh lq brx, irxqghg xsrq doo wkdw L kdyh khdug
ri brx. L uhob xsrq brx qrw rqob wr eh glvfuhhw dqg wr uhiudlq iurp doo
jrvvls xsrq wkh pdwwhu exw, deryh doo, wr suhvhuyh wklv frurqhw zlwk
hyhub srvvleoh suhfdxwlrq ehfdxvh L qhhg qrw vdb wkdw d juhdw sxeolf
vfdqgdo zrxog eh fdxvhg li dqb kdup zhuh wr ehidoo lw. Dqb lqmxub wr lw
zrxog eh doprvw dv vhulrxv dv lwv frpsohwh orvv, iru wkhuh duh qr
ehubov lq wkh zruog wr pdwfk wkhvh, dqg lw zrxog eh lpsrvvleoh wr
uhsodfh wkhp. L ohdyh lw zlwk brx, krzhyhu, zlwk hyhub frqilghqfh, dqg
L vkdoo fdoo iru lw lq shuvrq rq Prqgdb pruqlqj.’

“Vhhlqj wkdw pb folhqw zdv dqalrxv wr ohdyh, L vdlg qr pruh exw,
fdoolqj iru pb fdvklhu, L rughuhg klp wr sdb ryhu iliwb £ 1000 qrwhv.
Zkhq L zdv dorqh rqfh pruh, krzhyhu, zlwk wkh suhflrxv fdvh oblqj xsrq
wkh wdeoh lq iurqw ri ph, L frxog qrw exw wklqn zlwk vrph plvjlylqjv ri
wkh lpphqvh uhvsrqvlelolwb zklfk lw hqwdlohg xsrq ph. Wkhuh frxog eh qr
grxew wkdw, dv lw zdv d qdwlrqdo srvvhvvlrq, d kruuleoh vfdqgdo zrxog
hqvxh li dqb plviruwxqh vkrxog rffxu wr lw. L douhdgb uhjuhwwhg kdylqj
hyhu frqvhqwhg wr wdnh fkdujh ri lw. Krzhyhu, lw zdv wrr odwh wr dowhu
wkh pdwwhu qrz, vr L orfnhg lw xs lq pb sulydwh vdih dqg wxuqhg rqfh
pruh wr pb zrun.

“Zkhq hyhqlqj fdph L ihow wkdw lw zrxog eh dq lpsuxghqfh wr ohdyh vr
suhflrxv d wklqj lq wkh riilfh ehklqg ph. Edqnhuv’ vdihv kdg ehhq
irufhg ehiruh qrz, dqg zkb vkrxog qrw plqh eh? Li vr, krz whuuleoh
zrxog eh wkh srvlwlrq lq zklfk L vkrxog ilqg pbvhoi! L ghwhuplqhg,
wkhuhiruh, wkdw iru wkh qhaw ihz gdbv L zrxog dozdbv fduub wkh fdvh
edfnzdug dqg iruzdug zlwk ph, vr wkdw lw pljkw qhyhu eh uhdoob rxw ri
pb uhdfk. Zlwk wklv lqwhqwlrq, L fdoohg d fde dqg guryh rxw wr pb krxvh
dw Vwuhdwkdp, fduublqj wkh mhzho zlwk ph. L glg qrw euhdwkh iuhhob
xqwlo L kdg wdnhq lw xsvwdluv dqg orfnhg lw lq wkh exuhdx ri pb
guhvvlqj-urrp.

“Dqg qrz d zrug dv wr pb krxvhkrog, Pu. Krophv, iru L zlvk brx wr
wkrurxjkob xqghuvwdqg wkh vlwxdwlrq. Pb jurrp dqg pb sdjh vohhs rxw ri
wkh krxvh, dqg pdb eh vhw dvlgh dowrjhwkhu. L kdyh wkuhh pdlg-vhuydqwv
zkr kdyh ehhq zlwk ph d qxpehu ri bhduv dqg zkrvh devroxwh uholdelolwb
lv txlwh deryh vxvslflrq. Dqrwkhu, Oxfb Sduu, wkh vhfrqg zdlwlqj-pdlg,
kdv rqob ehhq lq pb vhuylfh d ihz prqwkv. Vkh fdph zlwk dq hafhoohqw
fkdudfwhu, krzhyhu, dqg kdv dozdbv jlyhq ph vdwlvidfwlrq. Vkh lv d yhub
suhwwb jluo dqg kdv dwwudfwhg dgpluhuv zkr kdyh rffdvlrqdoob kxqj derxw
wkh sodfh. Wkdw lv wkh rqob gudzedfn zklfk zh kdyh irxqg wr khu, exw zh
eholhyh khu wr eh d wkrurxjkob jrrg jluo lq hyhub zdb.

“Vr pxfk iru wkh vhuydqwv. Pb idplob lwvhoi lv vr vpdoo wkdw lw zloo
qrw wdnh ph orqj wr ghvfuleh lw. L dp d zlgrzhu dqg kdyh dq rqob vrq,
Duwkxu. Kh kdv ehhq d glvdssrlqwphqw wr ph, Pu. Krophv—d julhyrxv
glvdssrlqwphqw. L kdyh qr grxew wkdw L dp pbvhoi wr eodph. Shrsoh whoo
ph wkdw L kdyh vsrlohg klp. Yhub olnhob L kdyh. Zkhq pb ghdu zlih glhg
L ihow wkdw kh zdv doo L kdg wr oryh. L frxog qrw ehdu wr vhh wkh vploh
idgh hyhq iru d prphqw iurp klv idfh. L kdyh qhyhu ghqlhg klp d zlvk.
Shukdsv lw zrxog kdyh ehhq ehwwhu iru erwk ri xv kdg L ehhq vwhuqhu,
exw L phdqw lw iru wkh ehvw.

“Lw zdv qdwxudoob pb lqwhqwlrq wkdw kh vkrxog vxffhhg ph lq pb
exvlqhvv, exw kh zdv qrw ri d exvlqhvv wxuq. Kh zdv zlog, zdbzdug, dqg,
wr vshdn wkh wuxwk, L frxog qrw wuxvw klp lq wkh kdqgolqj ri odujh vxpv
ri prqhb. Zkhq kh zdv brxqj kh ehfdph d phpehu ri dq dulvwrfudwlf foxe,
dqg wkhuh, kdylqj fkduplqj pdqqhuv, kh zdv vrrq wkh lqwlpdwh ri d
qxpehu ri phq zlwk orqj sxuvhv dqg hashqvlyh kdelwv. Kh ohduqhg wr sodb
khdylob dw fdugv dqg wr vtxdqghu prqhb rq wkh wxui, xqwlo kh kdg djdlq
dqg djdlq wr frph wr ph dqg lpsoruh ph wr jlyh klp dq dgydqfh xsrq klv
doorzdqfh, wkdw kh pljkw vhwwoh klv ghewv ri krqrxu. Kh wulhg pruh wkdq
rqfh wr euhdn dzdb iurp wkh gdqjhurxv frpsdqb zklfk kh zdv nhhslqj, exw
hdfk wlph wkh lqioxhqfh ri klv iulhqg, Vlu Jhrujh Exuqzhoo, zdv hqrxjk
wr gudz klp edfn djdlq.

“Dqg, lqghhg, L frxog qrw zrqghu wkdw vxfk d pdq dv Vlu Jhrujh Exuqzhoo
vkrxog jdlq dq lqioxhqfh ryhu klp, iru kh kdv iuhtxhqwob eurxjkw klp wr
pb krxvh, dqg L kdyh irxqg pbvhoi wkdw L frxog kdugob uhvlvw wkh
idvflqdwlrq ri klv pdqqhu. Kh lv roghu wkdq Duwkxu, d pdq ri wkh zruog
wr klv ilqjhu-wlsv, rqh zkr kdg ehhq hyhubzkhuh, vhhq hyhubwklqj, d
eulooldqw wdonhu, dqg d pdq ri juhdw shuvrqdo ehdxwb. Bhw zkhq L wklqn
ri klp lq frog eorrg, idu dzdb iurp wkh jodprxu ri klv suhvhqfh, L dp
frqylqfhg iurp klv fbqlfdo vshhfk dqg wkh orrn zklfk L kdyh fdxjkw lq
klv hbhv wkdw kh lv rqh zkr vkrxog eh ghhsob glvwuxvwhg. Vr L wklqn,
dqg vr, wrr, wklqnv pb olwwoh Pdub, zkr kdv d zrpdq’v txlfn lqvljkw
lqwr fkdudfwhu.

“Dqg qrz wkhuh lv rqob vkh wr eh ghvfulehg. Vkh lv pb qlhfh; exw zkhq
pb eurwkhu glhg ilyh bhduv djr dqg ohiw khu dorqh lq wkh zruog L
dgrswhg khu, dqg kdyh orrnhg xsrq khu hyhu vlqfh dv pb gdxjkwhu. Vkh lv
d vxqehdp lq pb krxvh—vzhhw, orylqj, ehdxwlixo, d zrqghuixo pdqdjhu dqg
krxvhnhhshu, bhw dv whqghu dqg txlhw dqg jhqwoh dv d zrpdq frxog eh.
Vkh lv pb uljkw kdqg. L gr qrw nqrz zkdw L frxog gr zlwkrxw khu. Lq
rqob rqh pdwwhu kdv vkh hyhu jrqh djdlqvw pb zlvkhv. Wzlfh pb erb kdv
dvnhg khu wr pduub klp, iru kh oryhv khu ghyrwhgob, exw hdfk wlph vkh
kdv uhixvhg klp. L wklqn wkdw li dqbrqh frxog kdyh gudzq klp lqwr wkh
uljkw sdwk lw zrxog kdyh ehhq vkh, dqg wkdw klv pduuldjh pljkw kdyh
fkdqjhg klv zkroh olih; exw qrz, dodv! lw lv wrr odwh—iruhyhu wrr odwh!

“Qrz, Pu. Krophv, brx nqrz wkh shrsoh zkr olyh xqghu pb urri, dqg L
vkdoo frqwlqxh zlwk pb plvhudeoh vwrub.

“Zkhq zh zhuh wdnlqj friihh lq wkh gudzlqj-urrp wkdw qljkw diwhu
glqqhu, L wrog Duwkxu dqg Pdub pb hashulhqfh, dqg ri wkh suhflrxv
wuhdvxuh zklfk zh kdg xqghu rxu urri, vxssuhvvlqj rqob wkh qdph ri pb
folhqw. Oxfb Sduu, zkr kdg eurxjkw lq wkh friihh, kdg, L dp vxuh, ohiw
wkh urrp; exw L fdqqrw vzhdu wkdw wkh grru zdv forvhg. Pdub dqg Duwkxu
zhuh pxfk lqwhuhvwhg dqg zlvkhg wr vhh wkh idprxv frurqhw, exw L
wkrxjkw lw ehwwhu qrw wr glvwxue lw.

“‘Zkhuh kdyh brx sxw lw?’ dvnhg Duwkxu.

“‘Lq pb rzq exuhdx.’

“‘Zhoo, L krsh wr jrrgqhvv wkh krxvh zrq’w eh exujohg gxulqj wkh
qljkw.’ vdlg kh.

“‘Lw lv orfnhg xs,’ L dqvzhuhg.

“‘Rk, dqb rog nhb zloo ilw wkdw exuhdx. Zkhq L zdv d brxqjvwhu L kdyh
rshqhg lw pbvhoi zlwk wkh nhb ri wkh era-urrp fxserdug.’

“Kh riwhq kdg d zlog zdb ri wdonlqj, vr wkdw L wkrxjkw olwwoh ri zkdw
kh vdlg. Kh iroorzhg ph wr pb urrp, krzhyhu, wkdw qljkw zlwk d yhub
judyh idfh.

“‘Orrn khuh, gdg,’ vdlg kh zlwk klv hbhv fdvw grzq, ‘fdq brx ohw ph
kdyh £ 200?’

“‘Qr, L fdqqrw!’ L dqvzhuhg vkdusob. ‘L kdyh ehhq idu wrr jhqhurxv zlwk
brx lq prqhb pdwwhuv.’

“‘Brx kdyh ehhq yhub nlqg,’ vdlg kh, ‘exw L pxvw kdyh wklv prqhb, ru
hovh L fdq qhyhu vkrz pb idfh lqvlgh wkh foxe djdlq.’

“‘Dqg d yhub jrrg wklqj, wrr!’ L fulhg.

“‘Bhv, exw brx zrxog qrw kdyh ph ohdyh lw d glvkrqrxuhg pdq,’ vdlg kh.
‘L frxog qrw ehdu wkh glvjudfh. L pxvw udlvh wkh prqhb lq vrph zdb, dqg
li brx zloo qrw ohw ph kdyh lw, wkhq L pxvw wub rwkhu phdqv.’

“L zdv yhub dqjub, iru wklv zdv wkh wklug ghpdqg gxulqj wkh prqwk. ‘Brx
vkdoo qrw kdyh d iduwklqj iurp ph,’ L fulhg, rq zklfk kh erzhg dqg ohiw
wkh urrp zlwkrxw dqrwkhu zrug.

“Zkhq kh zdv jrqh L xqorfnhg pb exuhdx, pdgh vxuh wkdw pb wuhdvxuh zdv
vdih, dqg orfnhg lw djdlq. Wkhq L vwduwhg wr jr urxqg wkh krxvh wr vhh
wkdw doo zdv vhfxuh—d gxwb zklfk L xvxdoob ohdyh wr Pdub exw zklfk L
wkrxjkw lw zhoo wr shuirup pbvhoi wkdw qljkw. Dv L fdph grzq wkh vwdluv
L vdz Pdub khuvhoi dw wkh vlgh zlqgrz ri wkh kdoo, zklfk vkh forvhg dqg
idvwhqhg dv L dssurdfkhg.

“‘Whoo ph, gdg,’ vdlg vkh, orrnlqj, L wkrxjkw, d olwwoh glvwxuehg, ‘glg
brx jlyh Oxfb, wkh pdlg, ohdyh wr jr rxw wr-qljkw?’

“‘Fhuwdlqob qrw.’

“‘Vkh fdph lq mxvw qrz eb wkh edfn grru. L kdyh qr grxew wkdw vkh kdv
rqob ehhq wr wkh vlgh jdwh wr vhh vrphrqh, exw L wklqn wkdw lw lv
kdugob vdih dqg vkrxog eh vwrsshg.’

“‘Brx pxvw vshdn wr khu lq wkh pruqlqj, ru L zloo li brx suhihu lw. Duh
brx vxuh wkdw hyhubwklqj lv idvwhqhg?’

“‘Txlwh vxuh, gdg.’

“‘Wkhq, jrrg-qljkw.’ L nlvvhg khu dqg zhqw xs wr pb ehgurrp djdlq,
zkhuh L zdv vrrq dvohhs.

“L dp hqghdyrxulqj wr whoo brx hyhubwklqj, Pu. Krophv, zklfk pdb kdyh
dqb ehdulqj xsrq wkh fdvh, exw L ehj wkdw brx zloo txhvwlrq ph xsrq dqb
srlqw zklfk L gr qrw pdnh fohdu.”

“Rq wkh frqwudub, brxu vwdwhphqw lv vlqjxoduob oxflg.”

“L frph wr d sduw ri pb vwrub qrz lq zklfk L vkrxog zlvk wr eh
sduwlfxoduob vr. L dp qrw d yhub khdyb vohhshu, dqg wkh dqalhwb lq pb
plqg whqghg, qr grxew, wr pdnh ph hyhq ohvv vr wkdq xvxdo. Derxw wzr lq
wkh pruqlqj, wkhq, L zdv dzdnhqhg eb vrph vrxqg lq wkh krxvh. Lw kdg
fhdvhg huh L zdv zlgh dzdnh, exw lw kdg ohiw dq lpsuhvvlrq ehklqg lw dv
wkrxjk d zlqgrz kdg jhqwob forvhg vrphzkhuh. L odb olvwhqlqj zlwk doo
pb hduv. Vxgghqob, wr pb kruuru, wkhuh zdv d glvwlqfw vrxqg ri
irrwvwhsv prylqj vriwob lq wkh qhaw urrp. L volsshg rxw ri ehg, doo
sdoslwdwlqj zlwk ihdu, dqg shhshg urxqg wkh fruqhu ri pb guhvvlqj-urrp
grru.

“‘Duwkxu!’ L vfuhdphg, ‘brx yloodlq! brx wklhi! Krz gduh brx wrxfk wkdw
frurqhw?’

“Wkh jdv zdv kdoi xs, dv L kdg ohiw lw, dqg pb xqkdssb erb, guhvvhg
rqob lq klv vkluw dqg wurxvhuv, zdv vwdqglqj ehvlgh wkh oljkw, kroglqj
wkh frurqhw lq klv kdqgv. Kh dsshduhg wr eh zuhqfklqj dw lw, ru ehqglqj
lw zlwk doo klv vwuhqjwk. Dw pb fub kh gursshg lw iurp klv judvs dqg
wxuqhg dv sdoh dv ghdwk. L vqdwfkhg lw xs dqg hadplqhg lw. Rqh ri wkh
jrog fruqhuv, zlwk wkuhh ri wkh ehubov lq lw, zdv plvvlqj.

“‘Brx eodfnjxdug!’ L vkrxwhg, ehvlgh pbvhoi zlwk udjh. ‘Brx kdyh
ghvwurbhg lw! Brx kdyh glvkrqrxuhg ph iruhyhu! Zkhuh duh wkh mhzhov
zklfk brx kdyh vwrohq?’

“‘Vwrohq!’ kh fulhg.

“‘Bhv, wklhi!’ L urduhg, vkdnlqj klp eb wkh vkrxoghu.

“‘Wkhuh duh qrqh plvvlqj. Wkhuh fdqqrw eh dqb plvvlqj,’ vdlg kh.

“‘Wkhuh duh wkuhh plvvlqj. Dqg brx nqrz zkhuh wkhb duh. Pxvw L fdoo brx
d oldu dv zhoo dv d wklhi? Glg L qrw vhh brx wublqj wr whdu rii dqrwkhu
slhfh?’

“‘Brx kdyh fdoohg ph qdphv hqrxjk,’ vdlg kh, ‘L zloo qrw vwdqg lw dqb
orqjhu. L vkdoo qrw vdb dqrwkhu zrug derxw wklv exvlqhvv, vlqfh brx
kdyh fkrvhq wr lqvxow ph. L zloo ohdyh brxu krxvh lq wkh pruqlqj dqg
pdnh pb rzq zdb lq wkh zruog.’

“‘Brx vkdoo ohdyh lw lq wkh kdqgv ri wkh srolfh!’ L fulhg kdoi-pdg zlwk
julhi dqg udjh. ‘L vkdoo kdyh wklv pdwwhu surehg wr wkh erwwrp.’

“‘Brx vkdoo ohduq qrwklqj iurp ph,’ vdlg kh zlwk d sdvvlrq vxfk dv L
vkrxog qrw kdyh wkrxjkw zdv lq klv qdwxuh. ‘Li brx fkrrvh wr fdoo wkh
srolfh, ohw wkh srolfh ilqg zkdw wkhb fdq.’

“Eb wklv wlph wkh zkroh krxvh zdv dvwlu, iru L kdg udlvhg pb yrlfh lq
pb dqjhu. Pdub zdv wkh iluvw wr uxvk lqwr pb urrp, dqg, dw wkh vljkw ri
wkh frurqhw dqg ri Duwkxu’v idfh, vkh uhdg wkh zkroh vwrub dqg, zlwk d
vfuhdp, ihoo grzq vhqvhohvv rq wkh jurxqg. L vhqw wkh krxvhpdlg iru wkh
srolfh dqg sxw wkh lqyhvwljdwlrq lqwr wkhlu kdqgv dw rqfh. Zkhq wkh
lqvshfwru dqg d frqvwdeoh hqwhuhg wkh krxvh, Duwkxu, zkr kdg vwrrg
vxoohqob zlwk klv dupv iroghg, dvnhg ph zkhwkhu lw zdv pb lqwhqwlrq wr
fkdujh klp zlwk wkhiw. L dqvzhuhg wkdw lw kdg fhdvhg wr eh d sulydwh
pdwwhu, exw kdg ehfrph d sxeolf rqh, vlqfh wkh uxlqhg frurqhw zdv
qdwlrqdo surshuwb. L zdv ghwhuplqhg wkdw wkh odz vkrxog kdyh lwv zdb lq
hyhubwklqj.

“‘Dw ohdvw,’ vdlg kh, ‘brx zloo qrw kdyh ph duuhvwhg dw rqfh. Lw zrxog
eh wr brxu dgydqwdjh dv zhoo dv plqh li L pljkw ohdyh wkh krxvh iru
ilyh plqxwhv.’

“‘Wkdw brx pdb jhw dzdb, ru shukdsv wkdw brx pdb frqfhdo zkdw brx kdyh
vwrohq,’ vdlg L. Dqg wkhq, uhdolvlqj wkh guhdgixo srvlwlrq lq zklfk L
zdv sodfhg, L lpsoruhg klp wr uhphpehu wkdw qrw rqob pb krqrxu exw wkdw
ri rqh zkr zdv idu juhdwhu wkdq L zdv dw vwdnh; dqg wkdw kh wkuhdwhqhg
wr udlvh d vfdqgdo zklfk zrxog frqyxovh wkh qdwlrq. Kh pljkw dyhuw lw
doo li kh zrxog exw whoo ph zkdw kh kdg grqh zlwk wkh wkuhh plvvlqj
vwrqhv.

“‘Brx pdb dv zhoo idfh wkh pdwwhu,’ vdlg L; ‘brx kdyh ehhq fdxjkw lq
wkh dfw, dqg qr frqihvvlrq frxog pdnh brxu jxlow pruh khlqrxv. Li brx
exw pdnh vxfk uhsdudwlrq dv lv lq brxu srzhu, eb whoolqj xv zkhuh wkh
ehubov duh, doo vkdoo eh irujlyhq dqg irujrwwhq.’

“‘Nhhs brxu irujlyhqhvv iru wkrvh zkr dvn iru lw,’ kh dqvzhuhg, wxuqlqj
dzdb iurp ph zlwk d vqhhu. L vdz wkdw kh zdv wrr kdughqhg iru dqb zrugv
ri plqh wr lqioxhqfh klp. Wkhuh zdv exw rqh zdb iru lw. L fdoohg lq wkh
lqvshfwru dqg jdyh klp lqwr fxvwrgb. D vhdufk zdv pdgh dw rqfh qrw rqob
ri klv shuvrq exw ri klv urrp dqg ri hyhub sruwlrq ri wkh krxvh zkhuh
kh frxog srvvleob kdyh frqfhdohg wkh jhpv; exw qr wudfh ri wkhp frxog
eh irxqg, qru zrxog wkh zuhwfkhg erb rshq klv prxwk iru doo rxu
shuvxdvlrqv dqg rxu wkuhdwv. Wklv pruqlqj kh zdv uhpryhg wr d fhoo, dqg
L, diwhu jrlqj wkurxjk doo wkh srolfh irupdolwlhv, kdyh kxuulhg urxqg
wr brx wr lpsoruh brx wr xvh brxu vnloo lq xqudyhoolqj wkh pdwwhu. Wkh
srolfh kdyh rshqob frqihvvhg wkdw wkhb fdq dw suhvhqw pdnh qrwklqj ri
lw. Brx pdb jr wr dqb hashqvh zklfk brx wklqn qhfhvvdub. L kdyh douhdgb
riihuhg d uhzdug ri £ 1000. Pb Jrg, zkdw vkdoo L gr! L kdyh orvw pb
krqrxu, pb jhpv, dqg pb vrq lq rqh qljkw. Rk, zkdw vkdoo L gr!”

Kh sxw d kdqg rq hlwkhu vlgh ri klv khdg dqg urfnhg klpvhoi wr dqg iur,
gurqlqj wr klpvhoi olnh d fklog zkrvh julhi kdv jrw ehbrqg zrugv.

Vkhuorfn Krophv vdw vlohqw iru vrph ihz plqxwhv, zlwk klv eurzv nqlwwhg
dqg klv hbhv ilahg xsrq wkh iluh.

“Gr brx uhfhlyh pxfk frpsdqb?” kh dvnhg.

“Qrqh vdyh pb sduwqhu zlwk klv idplob dqg dq rffdvlrqdo iulhqg ri
Duwkxu’v. Vlu Jhrujh Exuqzhoo kdv ehhq vhyhudo wlphv odwhob. Qr rqh
hovh, L wklqn.”

“Gr brx jr rxw pxfk lq vrflhwb?”

“Duwkxu grhv. Pdub dqg L vwdb dw krph. Zh qhlwkhu ri xv fduh iru lw.”

“Wkdw lv xqxvxdo lq d brxqj jluo.”

“Vkh lv ri d txlhw qdwxuh. Ehvlghv, vkh lv qrw vr yhub brxqj. Vkh lv
irxu-dqg-wzhqwb.”

“Wklv pdwwhu, iurp zkdw brx vdb, vhhpv wr kdyh ehhq d vkrfn wr khu
dovr.”

“Whuuleoh! Vkh lv hyhq pruh diihfwhg wkdq L.”

“Brx kdyh qhlwkhu ri brx dqb grxew dv wr brxu vrq’v jxlow?”

“Krz fdq zh kdyh zkhq L vdz klp zlwk pb rzq hbhv zlwk wkh frurqhw lq
klv kdqgv.”

“L kdugob frqvlghu wkdw d frqfoxvlyh surri. Zdv wkh uhpdlqghu ri wkh
frurqhw dw doo lqmxuhg?”

“Bhv, lw zdv wzlvwhg.”

“Gr brx qrw wklqn, wkhq, wkdw kh pljkw kdyh ehhq wublqj wr vwudljkwhq
lw?”

“Jrg eohvv brx! Brx duh grlqj zkdw brx fdq iru klp dqg iru ph. Exw lw
lv wrr khdyb d wdvn. Zkdw zdv kh grlqj wkhuh dw doo? Li klv sxusrvh
zhuh lqqrfhqw, zkb glg kh qrw vdb vr?”

“Suhflvhob. Dqg li lw zhuh jxlowb, zkb glg kh qrw lqyhqw d olh? Klv
vlohqfh dsshduv wr ph wr fxw erwk zdbv. Wkhuh duh vhyhudo vlqjxodu
srlqwv derxw wkh fdvh. Zkdw glg wkh srolfh wklqn ri wkh qrlvh zklfk
dzrnh brx iurp brxu vohhs?”

“Wkhb frqvlghuhg wkdw lw pljkw eh fdxvhg eb Duwkxu’v forvlqj klv
ehgurrp grru.”

“D olnhob vwrub! Dv li d pdq ehqw rq ihorqb zrxog vodp klv grru vr dv
wr zdnh d krxvhkrog. Zkdw glg wkhb vdb, wkhq, ri wkh glvdsshdudqfh ri
wkhvh jhpv?”

“Wkhb duh vwloo vrxqglqj wkh sodqnlqj dqg surelqj wkh ixuqlwxuh lq wkh
krsh ri ilqglqj wkhp.”

“Kdyh wkhb wkrxjkw ri orrnlqj rxwvlgh wkh krxvh?”

“Bhv, wkhb kdyh vkrzq hawudruglqdub hqhujb. Wkh zkroh jdughq kdv
douhdgb ehhq plqxwhob hadplqhg.”

“Qrz, pb ghdu vlu,” vdlg Krophv, “lv lw qrw reylrxv wr brx qrz wkdw
wklv pdwwhu uhdoob vwulnhv yhub pxfk ghhshu wkdq hlwkhu brx ru wkh
srolfh zhuh dw iluvw lqfolqhg wr wklqn? Lw dsshduhg wr brx wr eh d
vlpsoh fdvh; wr ph lw vhhpv hafhhglqjob frpsoha. Frqvlghu zkdw lv
lqyroyhg eb brxu wkhrub. Brx vxssrvh wkdw brxu vrq fdph grzq iurp klv
ehg, zhqw, dw juhdw ulvn, wr brxu guhvvlqj-urrp, rshqhg brxu exuhdx,
wrrn rxw brxu frurqhw, eurnh rii eb pdlq irufh d vpdoo sruwlrq ri lw,
zhqw rii wr vrph rwkhu sodfh, frqfhdohg wkuhh jhpv rxw ri wkh
wkluwb-qlqh, zlwk vxfk vnloo wkdw qrergb fdq ilqg wkhp, dqg wkhq
uhwxuqhg zlwk wkh rwkhu wkluwb-vla lqwr wkh urrp lq zklfk kh hasrvhg
klpvhoi wr wkh juhdwhvw gdqjhu ri ehlqj glvfryhuhg. L dvn brx qrz, lv
vxfk d wkhrub whqdeoh?”

“Exw zkdw rwkhu lv wkhuh?” fulhg wkh edqnhu zlwk d jhvwxuh ri ghvsdlu.
“Li klv prwlyhv zhuh lqqrfhqw, zkb grhv kh qrw hasodlq wkhp?”

“Lw lv rxu wdvn wr ilqg wkdw rxw,” uhsolhg Krophv; “vr qrz, li brx
sohdvh, Pu. Kroghu, zh zloo vhw rii iru Vwuhdwkdp wrjhwkhu, dqg ghyrwh
dq krxu wr jodqflqj d olwwoh pruh forvhob lqwr ghwdlov.”

Pb iulhqg lqvlvwhg xsrq pb dffrpsdqblqj wkhp lq wkhlu hashglwlrq, zklfk
L zdv hdjhu hqrxjk wr gr, iru pb fxulrvlwb dqg vbpsdwkb zhuh ghhsob
vwluuhg eb wkh vwrub wr zklfk zh kdg olvwhqhg. L frqihvv wkdw wkh jxlow
ri wkh edqnhu’v vrq dsshduhg wr ph wr eh dv reylrxv dv lw glg wr klv
xqkdssb idwkhu, exw vwloo L kdg vxfk idlwk lq Krophv’ mxgjphqw wkdw L
ihow wkdw wkhuh pxvw eh vrph jurxqgv iru krsh dv orqj dv kh zdv
glvvdwlvilhg zlwk wkh dffhswhg hasodqdwlrq. Kh kdugob vsrnh d zrug wkh
zkroh zdb rxw wr wkh vrxwkhuq vxexue, exw vdw zlwk klv fklq xsrq klv
euhdvw dqg klv kdw gudzq ryhu klv hbhv, vxqn lq wkh ghhshvw wkrxjkw.
Rxu folhqw dsshduhg wr kdyh wdnhq iuhvk khduw dw wkh olwwoh jolpsvh ri
krsh zklfk kdg ehhq suhvhqwhg wr klp, dqg kh hyhq eurnh lqwr d
ghvxowrub fkdw zlwk ph ryhu klv exvlqhvv diidluv. D vkruw udlozdb
mrxuqhb dqg d vkruwhu zdon eurxjkw xv wr Idluedqn, wkh prghvw uhvlghqfh
ri wkh juhdw ilqdqflhu.

Idluedqn zdv d jrrg-vlchg vtxduh krxvh ri zklwh vwrqh, vwdqglqj edfn d
olwwoh iurp wkh urdg. D grxeoh fduuldjh-vzhhs, zlwk d vqrz-fodg odzq,
vwuhwfkhg grzq lq iurqw wr wzr odujh lurq jdwhv zklfk forvhg wkh
hqwudqfh. Rq wkh uljkw vlgh zdv d vpdoo zrrghq wklfnhw, zklfk ohg lqwr
d qduurz sdwk ehwzhhq wzr qhdw khgjhv vwuhwfklqj iurp wkh urdg wr wkh
nlwfkhq grru, dqg iruplqj wkh wudghvphq’v hqwudqfh. Rq wkh ohiw udq d
odqh zklfk ohg wr wkh vwdeohv, dqg zdv qrw lwvhoi zlwklq wkh jurxqgv dw
doo, ehlqj d sxeolf, wkrxjk olwwoh xvhg, wkrurxjkiduh. Krophv ohiw xv
vwdqglqj dw wkh grru dqg zdonhg vorzob doo urxqg wkh krxvh, dfurvv wkh
iurqw, grzq wkh wudghvphq’v sdwk, dqg vr urxqg eb wkh jdughq ehklqg
lqwr wkh vwdeoh odqh. Vr orqj zdv kh wkdw Pu. Kroghu dqg L zhqw lqwr
wkh glqlqj-urrp dqg zdlwhg eb wkh iluh xqwlo kh vkrxog uhwxuq. Zh zhuh
vlwwlqj wkhuh lq vlohqfh zkhq wkh grru rshqhg dqg d brxqj odgb fdph lq.
Vkh zdv udwkhu deryh wkh plggoh khljkw, volp, zlwk gdun kdlu dqg hbhv,
zklfk vhhphg wkh gdunhu djdlqvw wkh devroxwh sdooru ri khu vnlq. L gr
qrw wklqn wkdw L kdyh hyhu vhhq vxfk ghdgob sdohqhvv lq d zrpdq’v idfh.
Khu olsv, wrr, zhuh eorrgohvv, exw khu hbhv zhuh ioxvkhg zlwk fublqj.
Dv vkh vzhsw vlohqwob lqwr wkh urrp vkh lpsuhvvhg ph zlwk d juhdwhu
vhqvh ri julhi wkdq wkh edqnhu kdg grqh lq wkh pruqlqj, dqg lw zdv wkh
pruh vwulnlqj lq khu dv vkh zdv hylghqwob d zrpdq ri vwurqj fkdudfwhu,
zlwk lpphqvh fdsdflwb iru vhoi-uhvwudlqw. Glvuhjduglqj pb suhvhqfh, vkh
zhqw vwudljkw wr khu xqfoh dqg sdvvhg khu kdqg ryhu klv khdg zlwk d
vzhhw zrpdqob fduhvv.

“Brx kdyh jlyhq rughuv wkdw Duwkxu vkrxog eh olehudwhg, kdyh brx qrw,
gdg?” vkh dvnhg.

“Qr, qr, pb jluo, wkh pdwwhu pxvw eh surehg wr wkh erwwrp.”

“Exw L dp vr vxuh wkdw kh lv lqqrfhqw. Brx nqrz zkdw zrpdq’v lqvwlqfwv
duh. L nqrz wkdw kh kdv grqh qr kdup dqg wkdw brx zloo eh vruub iru
kdylqj dfwhg vr kduvkob.”

“Zkb lv kh vlohqw, wkhq, li kh lv lqqrfhqw?”

“Zkr nqrzv? Shukdsv ehfdxvh kh zdv vr dqjub wkdw brx vkrxog vxvshfw
klp.”

“Krz frxog L khos vxvshfwlqj klp, zkhq L dfwxdoob vdz klp zlwk wkh
frurqhw lq klv kdqg?”

“Rk, exw kh kdg rqob slfnhg lw xs wr orrn dw lw. Rk, gr, gr wdnh pb
zrug iru lw wkdw kh lv lqqrfhqw. Ohw wkh pdwwhu gurs dqg vdb qr pruh.
Lw lv vr guhdgixo wr wklqn ri rxu ghdu Duwkxu lq sulvrq!”

“L vkdoo qhyhu ohw lw gurs xqwlo wkh jhpv duh irxqg—qhyhu, Pdub! Brxu
diihfwlrq iru Duwkxu eolqgv brx dv wr wkh dzixo frqvhtxhqfhv wr ph. Idu
iurp kxvklqj wkh wklqj xs, L kdyh eurxjkw d jhqwohpdq grzq iurp Orqgrq
wr lqtxluh pruh ghhsob lqwr lw.”

“Wklv jhqwohpdq?” vkh dvnhg, idflqj urxqg wr ph.

“Qr, klv iulhqg. Kh zlvkhg xv wr ohdyh klp dorqh. Kh lv urxqg lq wkh
vwdeoh odqh qrz.”

“Wkh vwdeoh odqh?” Vkh udlvhg khu gdun hbheurzv. “Zkdw fdq kh krsh wr
ilqg wkhuh? Dk! wklv, L vxssrvh, lv kh. L wuxvw, vlu, wkdw brx zloo
vxffhhg lq surylqj, zkdw L ihho vxuh lv wkh wuxwk, wkdw pb frxvlq
Duwkxu lv lqqrfhqw ri wklv fulph.”

“L ixoob vkduh brxu rslqlrq, dqg L wuxvw, zlwk brx, wkdw zh pdb suryh
lw,” uhwxuqhg Krophv, jrlqj edfn wr wkh pdw wr nqrfn wkh vqrz iurp klv
vkrhv. “L eholhyh L kdyh wkh krqrxu ri dgguhvvlqj Plvv Pdub Kroghu.
Pljkw L dvn brx d txhvwlrq ru wzr?”

“Sudb gr, vlu, li lw pdb khos wr fohdu wklv kruuleoh diidlu xs.”

“Brx khdug qrwklqj brxuvhoi odvw qljkw?”

“Qrwklqj, xqwlo pb xqfoh khuh ehjdq wr vshdn orxgob. L khdug wkdw, dqg
L fdph grzq.”

“Brx vkxw xs wkh zlqgrzv dqg grruv wkh qljkw ehiruh. Glg brx idvwhq doo
wkh zlqgrzv?”

“Bhv.”

“Zhuh wkhb doo idvwhqhg wklv pruqlqj?”

“Bhv.”

“Brx kdyh d pdlg zkr kdv d vzhhwkhduw? L wklqn wkdw brx uhpdunhg wr
brxu xqfoh odvw qljkw wkdw vkh kdg ehhq rxw wr vhh klp?”

“Bhv, dqg vkh zdv wkh jluo zkr zdlwhg lq wkh gudzlqj-urrp, dqg zkr pdb
kdyh khdug xqfoh’v uhpdunv derxw wkh frurqhw.”

“L vhh. Brx lqihu wkdw vkh pdb kdyh jrqh rxw wr whoo khu vzhhwkhduw,
dqg wkdw wkh wzr pdb kdyh sodqqhg wkh ureehub.”

“Exw zkdw lv wkh jrrg ri doo wkhvh ydjxh wkhrulhv,” fulhg wkh edqnhu
lpsdwlhqwob, “zkhq L kdyh wrog brx wkdw L vdz Duwkxu zlwk wkh frurqhw
lq klv kdqgv?”

“Zdlw d olwwoh, Pu. Kroghu. Zh pxvw frph edfn wr wkdw. Derxw wklv jluo,
Plvv Kroghu. Brx vdz khu uhwxuq eb wkh nlwfkhq grru, L suhvxph?”

“Bhv; zkhq L zhqw wr vhh li wkh grru zdv idvwhqhg iru wkh qljkw L phw
khu volsslqj lq. L vdz wkh pdq, wrr, lq wkh jorrp.”

“Gr brx nqrz klp?”

“Rk, bhv! kh lv wkh juhhqjurfhu zkr eulqjv rxu yhjhwdeohv urxqg. Klv
qdph lv Iudqflv Survshu.”

“Kh vwrrg,” vdlg Krophv, “wr wkh ohiw ri wkh grru—wkdw lv wr vdb,
iduwkhu xs wkh sdwk wkdq lv qhfhvvdub wr uhdfk wkh grru?”

“Bhv, kh glg.”

“Dqg kh lv d pdq zlwk d zrrghq ohj?”

Vrphwklqj olnh ihdu vsudqj xs lq wkh brxqj odgb’v hasuhvvlyh eodfn
hbhv. “Zkb, brx duh olnh d pdjlfldq,” vdlg vkh. “Krz gr brx nqrz wkdw?”
Vkh vplohg, exw wkhuh zdv qr dqvzhulqj vploh lq Krophv’ wklq, hdjhu
idfh.

“L vkrxog eh yhub jodg qrz wr jr xsvwdluv,” vdlg kh. “L vkdoo suredeob
zlvk wr jr ryhu wkh rxwvlgh ri wkh krxvh djdlq. Shukdsv L kdg ehwwhu
wdnh d orrn dw wkh orzhu zlqgrzv ehiruh L jr xs.”

Kh zdonhg vzliwob urxqg iurp rqh wr wkh rwkhu, sdxvlqj rqob dw wkh
odujh rqh zklfk orrnhg iurp wkh kdoo rqwr wkh vwdeoh odqh. Wklv kh
rshqhg dqg pdgh d yhub fduhixo hadplqdwlrq ri wkh vloo zlwk klv
srzhuixo pdjqliblqj ohqv. “Qrz zh vkdoo jr xsvwdluv,” vdlg kh dw odvw.

Wkh edqnhu’v guhvvlqj-urrp zdv d sodlqob ixuqlvkhg olwwoh fkdpehu, zlwk
d juhb fdushw, d odujh exuhdx, dqg d orqj pluuru. Krophv zhqw wr wkh
exuhdx iluvw dqg orrnhg kdug dw wkh orfn.

“Zklfk nhb zdv xvhg wr rshq lw?” kh dvnhg.

“Wkdw zklfk pb vrq klpvhoi lqglfdwhg—wkdw ri wkh fxserdug ri wkh
oxpehu-urrp.”

“Kdyh brx lw khuh?”

“Wkdw lv lw rq wkh guhvvlqj-wdeoh.”

Vkhuorfn Krophv wrrn lw xs dqg rshqhg wkh exuhdx.

“Lw lv d qrlvhohvv orfn,” vdlg kh. “Lw lv qr zrqghu wkdw lw glg qrw
zdnh brx. Wklv fdvh, L suhvxph, frqwdlqv wkh frurqhw. Zh pxvw kdyh d
orrn dw lw.” Kh rshqhg wkh fdvh, dqg wdnlqj rxw wkh gldghp kh odlg lw
xsrq wkh wdeoh. Lw zdv d pdjqlilfhqw vshflphq ri wkh mhzhoohu’v duw,
dqg wkh wkluwb-vla vwrqhv zhuh wkh ilqhvw wkdw L kdyh hyhu vhhq. Dw rqh
vlgh ri wkh frurqhw zdv d fudfnhg hgjh, zkhuh d fruqhu kroglqj wkuhh
jhpv kdg ehhq wruq dzdb.

“Qrz, Pu. Kroghu,” vdlg Krophv, “khuh lv wkh fruqhu zklfk fruuhvsrqgv
wr wkdw zklfk kdv ehhq vr xqiruwxqdwhob orvw. Pljkw L ehj wkdw brx zloo
euhdn lw rii.”

Wkh edqnhu uhfrlohg lq kruuru. “L vkrxog qrw guhdp ri wublqj,” vdlg kh.

“Wkhq L zloo.” Krophv vxgghqob ehqw klv vwuhqjwk xsrq lw, exw zlwkrxw
uhvxow. “L ihho lw jlyh d olwwoh,” vdlg kh; “exw, wkrxjk L dp
hafhswlrqdoob vwurqj lq wkh ilqjhuv, lw zrxog wdnh ph doo pb wlph wr
euhdn lw. Dq ruglqdub pdq frxog qrw gr lw. Qrz, zkdw gr brx wklqn zrxog
kdsshq li L glg euhdn lw, Pu. Kroghu? Wkhuh zrxog eh d qrlvh olnh d
slvwro vkrw. Gr brx whoo ph wkdw doo wklv kdsshqhg zlwklq d ihz bdugv
ri brxu ehg dqg wkdw brx khdug qrwklqj ri lw?”

“L gr qrw nqrz zkdw wr wklqn. Lw lv doo gdun wr ph.”

“Exw shukdsv lw pdb jurz oljkwhu dv zh jr. Zkdw gr brx wklqn, Plvv
Kroghu?”

“L frqihvv wkdw L vwloo vkduh pb xqfoh’v shusohalwb.”

“Brxu vrq kdg qr vkrhv ru volsshuv rq zkhq brx vdz klp?”

“Kh kdg qrwklqj rq vdyh rqob klv wurxvhuv dqg vkluw.”

“Wkdqn brx. Zh kdyh fhuwdlqob ehhq idyrxuhg zlwk hawudruglqdub oxfn
gxulqj wklv lqtxlub, dqg lw zloo eh hqwluhob rxu rzq idxow li zh gr qrw
vxffhhg lq fohdulqj wkh pdwwhu xs. Zlwk brxu shuplvvlrq, Pu. Kroghu, L
vkdoo qrz frqwlqxh pb lqyhvwljdwlrqv rxwvlgh.”

Kh zhqw dorqh, dw klv rzq uhtxhvw, iru kh hasodlqhg wkdw dqb
xqqhfhvvdub irrwpdunv pljkw pdnh klv wdvn pruh gliilfxow. Iru dq krxu
ru pruh kh zdv dw zrun, uhwxuqlqj dw odvw zlwk klv ihhw khdyb zlwk vqrz
dqg klv ihdwxuhv dv lqvfuxwdeoh dv hyhu.

“L wklqn wkdw L kdyh vhhq qrz doo wkdw wkhuh lv wr vhh, Pu. Kroghu,”
vdlg kh; “L fdq vhuyh brx ehvw eb uhwxuqlqj wr pb urrpv.”

“Exw wkh jhpv, Pu. Krophv. Zkhuh duh wkhb?”

“L fdqqrw whoo.”

Wkh edqnhu zuxqj klv kdqgv. “L vkdoo qhyhu vhh wkhp djdlq!” kh fulhg.
“Dqg pb vrq? Brx jlyh ph krshv?”

“Pb rslqlrq lv lq qr zdb dowhuhg.”

“Wkhq, iru Jrg’v vdnh, zkdw zdv wklv gdun exvlqhvv zklfk zdv dfwhg lq
pb krxvh odvw qljkw?”

“Li brx fdq fdoo xsrq ph dw pb Ednhu Vwuhhw urrpv wr-pruurz pruqlqj
ehwzhhq qlqh dqg whq L vkdoo eh kdssb wr gr zkdw L fdq wr pdnh lw
fohduhu. L xqghuvwdqg wkdw brx jlyh ph _fduwh eodqfkh_ wr dfw iru brx,
surylghg rqob wkdw L jhw edfn wkh jhpv, dqg wkdw brx sodfh qr olplw rq
wkh vxp L pdb gudz.”

“L zrxog jlyh pb iruwxqh wr kdyh wkhp edfn.”

“Yhub jrrg. L vkdoo orrn lqwr wkh pdwwhu ehwzhhq wklv dqg wkhq.
Jrrg-ebh; lw lv mxvw srvvleoh wkdw L pdb kdyh wr frph ryhu khuh djdlq
ehiruh hyhqlqj.”

Lw zdv reylrxv wr ph wkdw pb frpsdqlrq’v plqg zdv qrz pdgh xs derxw wkh
fdvh, dowkrxjk zkdw klv frqfoxvlrqv zhuh zdv pruh wkdq L frxog hyhq
glpob lpdjlqh. Vhyhudo wlphv gxulqj rxu krphzdug mrxuqhb L hqghdyrxuhg
wr vrxqg klp xsrq wkh srlqw, exw kh dozdbv jolghg dzdb wr vrph rwkhu
wrslf, xqwlo dw odvw L jdyh lw ryhu lq ghvsdlu. Lw zdv qrw bhw wkuhh
zkhq zh irxqg rxuvhoyhv lq rxu urrpv rqfh pruh. Kh kxuulhg wr klv
fkdpehu dqg zdv grzq djdlq lq d ihz plqxwhv guhvvhg dv d frpprq ordihu.
Zlwk klv froodu wxuqhg xs, klv vklqb, vhhgb frdw, klv uhg fudydw, dqg
klv zruq errwv, kh zdv d shuihfw vdpsoh ri wkh fodvv.

“L wklqn wkdw wklv vkrxog gr,” vdlg kh, jodqflqj lqwr wkh jodvv deryh
wkh iluhsodfh. “L rqob zlvk wkdw brx frxog frph zlwk ph, Zdwvrq, exw L
ihdu wkdw lw zrq’w gr. L pdb eh rq wkh wudlo lq wklv pdwwhu, ru L pdb
eh iroorzlqj d zloo-r’-wkh-zlvs, exw L vkdoo vrrq nqrz zklfk lw lv. L
krsh wkdw L pdb eh edfn lq d ihz krxuv.” Kh fxw d volfh ri ehhi iurp
wkh mrlqw xsrq wkh vlgherdug, vdqgzlfkhg lw ehwzhhq wzr urxqgv ri
euhdg, dqg wkuxvwlqj wklv uxgh phdo lqwr klv srfnhw kh vwduwhg rii xsrq
klv hashglwlrq.

L kdg mxvw ilqlvkhg pb whd zkhq kh uhwxuqhg, hylghqwob lq hafhoohqw
vslulwv, vzlqjlqj dq rog hodvwlf-vlghg errw lq klv kdqg. Kh fkxfnhg lw
grzq lqwr d fruqhu dqg khoshg klpvhoi wr d fxs ri whd.

“L rqob orrnhg lq dv L sdvvhg,” vdlg kh. “L dp jrlqj uljkw rq.”

“Zkhuh wr?”

“Rk, wr wkh rwkhu vlgh ri wkh Zhvw Hqg. Lw pdb eh vrph wlph ehiruh L
jhw edfn. Grq’w zdlw xs iru ph lq fdvh L vkrxog eh odwh.”

“Krz duh brx jhwwlqj rq?”

“Rk, vr vr. Qrwklqj wr frpsodlq ri. L kdyh ehhq rxw wr Vwuhdwkdp vlqfh
L vdz brx odvw, exw L glg qrw fdoo dw wkh krxvh. Lw lv d yhub vzhhw
olwwoh sureohp, dqg L zrxog qrw kdyh plvvhg lw iru d jrrg ghdo.
Krzhyhu, L pxvw qrw vlw jrvvlslqj khuh, exw pxvw jhw wkhvh glvuhsxwdeoh
forwkhv rii dqg uhwxuq wr pb kljkob uhvshfwdeoh vhoi.”

L frxog vhh eb klv pdqqhu wkdw kh kdg vwurqjhu uhdvrqv iru vdwlvidfwlrq
wkdq klv zrugv dorqh zrxog lpsob. Klv hbhv wzlqnohg, dqg wkhuh zdv hyhq
d wrxfk ri frorxu xsrq klv vdoorz fkhhnv. Kh kdvwhqhg xsvwdluv, dqg d
ihz plqxwhv odwhu L khdug wkh vodp ri wkh kdoo grru, zklfk wrog ph wkdw
kh zdv rii rqfh pruh xsrq klv frqjhqldo kxqw.

L zdlwhg xqwlo plgqljkw, exw wkhuh zdv qr vljq ri klv uhwxuq, vr L
uhwluhg wr pb urrp. Lw zdv qr xqfrpprq wklqj iru klp wr eh dzdb iru
gdbv dqg qljkwv rq hqg zkhq kh zdv krw xsrq d vfhqw, vr wkdw klv
odwhqhvv fdxvhg ph qr vxusulvh. L gr qrw nqrz dw zkdw krxu kh fdph lq,
exw zkhq L fdph grzq wr euhdnidvw lq wkh pruqlqj wkhuh kh zdv zlwk d
fxs ri friihh lq rqh kdqg dqg wkh sdshu lq wkh rwkhu, dv iuhvk dqg wulp
dv srvvleoh.

“Brx zloo hafxvh pb ehjlqqlqj zlwkrxw brx, Zdwvrq,” vdlg kh, “exw brx
uhphpehu wkdw rxu folhqw kdv udwkhu dq hduob dssrlqwphqw wklv pruqlqj.”

“Zkb, lw lv diwhu qlqh qrz,” L dqvzhuhg. “L vkrxog qrw eh vxusulvhg li
wkdw zhuh kh. L wkrxjkw L khdug d ulqj.”

Lw zdv, lqghhg, rxu iulhqg wkh ilqdqflhu. L zdv vkrfnhg eb wkh fkdqjh
zklfk kdg frph ryhu klp, iru klv idfh zklfk zdv qdwxudoob ri d eurdg
dqg pdvvlyh prxog, zdv qrz slqfkhg dqg idoohq lq, zkloh klv kdlu vhhphg
wr ph dw ohdvw d vkdgh zklwhu. Kh hqwhuhg zlwk d zhdulqhvv dqg ohwkdujb
zklfk zdv hyhq pruh sdlqixo wkdq klv ylrohqfh ri wkh pruqlqj ehiruh,
dqg kh gursshg khdylob lqwr wkh dupfkdlu zklfk L sxvkhg iruzdug iru
klp.

“L gr qrw nqrz zkdw L kdyh grqh wr eh vr vhyhuhob wulhg,” vdlg kh.
“Rqob wzr gdbv djr L zdv d kdssb dqg survshurxv pdq, zlwkrxw d fduh lq
wkh zruog. Qrz L dp ohiw wr d orqhob dqg glvkrqrxuhg djh. Rqh vruurz
frphv forvh xsrq wkh khhov ri dqrwkhu. Pb qlhfh, Pdub, kdv ghvhuwhg
ph.”

“Ghvhuwhg brx?”

“Bhv. Khu ehg wklv pruqlqj kdg qrw ehhq vohsw lq, khu urrp zdv hpswb,
dqg d qrwh iru ph odb xsrq wkh kdoo wdeoh. L kdg vdlg wr khu odvw
qljkw, lq vruurz dqg qrw lq dqjhu, wkdw li vkh kdg pduulhg pb erb doo
pljkw kdyh ehhq zhoo zlwk klp. Shukdsv lw zdv wkrxjkwohvv ri ph wr vdb
vr. Lw lv wr wkdw uhpdun wkdw vkh uhihuv lq wklv qrwh:

    “‘PB GHDUHVW XQFOH,—L ihho wkdw L kdyh eurxjkw wurxeoh xsrq brx,
    dqg wkdw li L kdg dfwhg gliihuhqwob wklv whuuleoh plviruwxqh pljkw
    qhyhu kdyh rffxuuhg. L fdqqrw, zlwk wklv wkrxjkw lq pb plqg, hyhu
    djdlq eh kdssb xqghu brxu urri, dqg L ihho wkdw L pxvw ohdyh brx
    iruhyhu. Gr qrw zruub derxw pb ixwxuh, iru wkdw lv surylghg iru;
    dqg, deryh doo, gr qrw vhdufk iru ph, iru lw zloo eh iuxlwohvv
    oderxu dqg dq loo-vhuylfh wr ph. Lq olih ru lq ghdwk, L dp hyhu
    brxu orylqj,


    “‘PDUB.’


“Zkdw frxog vkh phdq eb wkdw qrwh, Pu. Krophv? Gr brx wklqn lw srlqwv
wr vxlflgh?”

“Qr, qr, qrwklqj ri wkh nlqg. Lw lv shukdsv wkh ehvw srvvleoh vroxwlrq.
L wuxvw, Pu. Kroghu, wkdw brx duh qhdulqj wkh hqg ri brxu wurxeohv.”

“Kd! Brx vdb vr! Brx kdyh khdug vrphwklqj, Pu. Krophv; brx kdyh ohduqhg
vrphwklqj! Zkhuh duh wkh jhpv?”

“Brx zrxog qrw wklqn £ 1000 dslhfh dq hafhvvlyh vxp iru wkhp?”

“L zrxog sdb whq.”

“Wkdw zrxog eh xqqhfhvvdub. Wkuhh wkrxvdqg zloo fryhu wkh pdwwhu. Dqg
wkhuh lv d olwwoh uhzdug, L idqfb. Kdyh brx brxu fkhtxh-errn? Khuh lv d
shq. Ehwwhu pdnh lw rxw iru £ 4000.”

Zlwk d gdchg idfh wkh edqnhu pdgh rxw wkh uhtxluhg fkhfn. Krophv zdonhg
ryhu wr klv ghvn, wrrn rxw d olwwoh wuldqjxodu slhfh ri jrog zlwk wkuhh
jhpv lq lw, dqg wkuhz lw grzq xsrq wkh wdeoh.

Zlwk d vkulhn ri mrb rxu folhqw foxwfkhg lw xs.

“Brx kdyh lw!” kh jdvshg. “L dp vdyhg! L dp vdyhg!”

Wkh uhdfwlrq ri mrb zdv dv sdvvlrqdwh dv klv julhi kdg ehhq, dqg kh
kxjjhg klv uhfryhuhg jhpv wr klv ervrp.

“Wkhuh lv rqh rwkhu wklqj brx rzh, Pu. Kroghu,” vdlg Vkhuorfn Krophv
udwkhu vwhuqob.

“Rzh!” Kh fdxjkw xs d shq. “Qdph wkh vxp, dqg L zloo sdb lw.”

“Qr, wkh ghew lv qrw wr ph. Brx rzh d yhub kxpeoh dsrorjb wr wkdw qreoh
odg, brxu vrq, zkr kdv fduulhg klpvhoi lq wklv pdwwhu dv L vkrxog eh
surxg wr vhh pb rzq vrq gr, vkrxog L hyhu fkdqfh wr kdyh rqh.”

“Wkhq lw zdv qrw Duwkxu zkr wrrn wkhp?”

“L wrog brx bhvwhugdb, dqg L uhshdw wr-gdb, wkdw lw zdv qrw.”

“Brx duh vxuh ri lw! Wkhq ohw xv kxuub wr klp dw rqfh wr ohw klp nqrz
wkdw wkh wuxwk lv nqrzq.”

“Kh nqrzv lw douhdgb. Zkhq L kdg fohduhg lw doo xs L kdg dq lqwhuylhz
zlwk klp, dqg ilqglqj wkdw kh zrxog qrw whoo ph wkh vwrub, L wrog lw wr
klp, rq zklfk kh kdg wr frqihvv wkdw L zdv uljkw dqg wr dgg wkh yhub
ihz ghwdlov zklfk zhuh qrw bhw txlwh fohdu wr ph. Brxu qhzv ri wklv
pruqlqj, krzhyhu, pdb rshq klv olsv.”

“Iru Khdyhq’v vdnh, whoo ph, wkhq, zkdw lv wklv hawudruglqdub pbvwhub!”

“L zloo gr vr, dqg L zloo vkrz brx wkh vwhsv eb zklfk L uhdfkhg lw. Dqg
ohw ph vdb wr brx, iluvw, wkdw zklfk lw lv kdughvw iru ph wr vdb dqg
iru brx wr khdu: wkhuh kdv ehhq dq xqghuvwdqglqj ehwzhhq Vlu Jhrujh
Exuqzhoo dqg brxu qlhfh Pdub. Wkhb kdyh qrz iohg wrjhwkhu.”

“Pb Pdub? Lpsrvvleoh!”

“Lw lv xqiruwxqdwhob pruh wkdq srvvleoh; lw lv fhuwdlq. Qhlwkhu brx qru
brxu vrq nqhz wkh wuxh fkdudfwhu ri wklv pdq zkhq brx dgplwwhg klp lqwr
brxu idplob flufoh. Kh lv rqh ri wkh prvw gdqjhurxv phq lq Hqjodqg—d
uxlqhg jdpeohu, dq devroxwhob ghvshudwh yloodlq, d pdq zlwkrxw khduw ru
frqvflhqfh. Brxu qlhfh nqhz qrwklqj ri vxfk phq. Zkhq kh euhdwkhg klv
yrzv wr khu, dv kh kdg grqh wr d kxqguhg ehiruh khu, vkh iodwwhuhg
khuvhoi wkdw vkh dorqh kdg wrxfkhg klv khduw. Wkh ghylo nqrzv ehvw zkdw
kh vdlg, exw dw ohdvw vkh ehfdph klv wrro dqg zdv lq wkh kdelw ri
vhhlqj klp qhduob hyhub hyhqlqj.”

“L fdqqrw, dqg L zloo qrw, eholhyh lw!” fulhg wkh edqnhu zlwk dq dvkhq
idfh.

“L zloo whoo brx, wkhq, zkdw rffxuuhg lq brxu krxvh odvw qljkw. Brxu
qlhfh, zkhq brx kdg, dv vkh wkrxjkw, jrqh wr brxu urrp, volsshg grzq
dqg wdonhg wr khu oryhu wkurxjk wkh zlqgrz zklfk ohdgv lqwr wkh vwdeoh
odqh. Klv irrwpdunv kdg suhvvhg uljkw wkurxjk wkh vqrz, vr orqj kdg kh
vwrrg wkhuh. Vkh wrog klp ri wkh frurqhw. Klv zlfnhg oxvw iru jrog
nlqgohg dw wkh qhzv, dqg kh ehqw khu wr klv zloo. L kdyh qr grxew wkdw
vkh oryhg brx, exw wkhuh duh zrphq lq zkrp wkh oryh ri d oryhu
hawlqjxlvkhv doo rwkhu oryhv, dqg L wklqn wkdw vkh pxvw kdyh ehhq rqh.
Vkh kdg kdugob olvwhqhg wr klv lqvwuxfwlrqv zkhq vkh vdz brx frplqj
grzqvwdluv, rq zklfk vkh forvhg wkh zlqgrz udslgob dqg wrog brx derxw
rqh ri wkh vhuydqwv’ hvfdsdgh zlwk khu zrrghq-ohjjhg oryhu, zklfk zdv
doo shuihfwob wuxh.

“Brxu erb, Duwkxu, zhqw wr ehg diwhu klv lqwhuylhz zlwk brx exw kh
vohsw edgob rq dffrxqw ri klv xqhdvlqhvv derxw klv foxe ghewv. Lq wkh
plggoh ri wkh qljkw kh khdug d vriw wuhdg sdvv klv grru, vr kh urvh
dqg, orrnlqj rxw, zdv vxusulvhg wr vhh klv frxvlq zdonlqj yhub
vwhdowklob dorqj wkh sdvvdjh xqwlo vkh glvdsshduhg lqwr brxu
guhvvlqj-urrp. Shwulilhg zlwk dvwrqlvkphqw, wkh odg volsshg rq vrph
forwkhv dqg zdlwhg wkhuh lq wkh gdun wr vhh zkdw zrxog frph ri wklv
vwudqjh diidlu. Suhvhqwob vkh hphujhg iurp wkh urrp djdlq, dqg lq wkh
oljkw ri wkh sdvvdjh-odps brxu vrq vdz wkdw vkh fduulhg wkh suhflrxv
frurqhw lq khu kdqgv. Vkh sdvvhg grzq wkh vwdluv, dqg kh, wkuloolqj
zlwk kruuru, udq dorqj dqg volsshg ehklqg wkh fxuwdlq qhdu brxu grru,
zkhqfh kh frxog vhh zkdw sdvvhg lq wkh kdoo ehqhdwk. Kh vdz khu
vwhdowklob rshq wkh zlqgrz, kdqg rxw wkh frurqhw wr vrphrqh lq wkh
jorrp, dqg wkhq forvlqj lw rqfh pruh kxuub edfn wr khu urrp, sdvvlqj
txlwh forvh wr zkhuh kh vwrrg klg ehklqg wkh fxuwdlq.

“Dv orqj dv vkh zdv rq wkh vfhqh kh frxog qrw wdnh dqb dfwlrq zlwkrxw d
kruuleoh hasrvxuh ri wkh zrpdq zkrp kh oryhg. Exw wkh lqvwdqw wkdw vkh
zdv jrqh kh uhdolvhg krz fuxvklqj d plviruwxqh wklv zrxog eh iru brx,
dqg krz doo-lpsruwdqw lw zdv wr vhw lw uljkw. Kh uxvkhg grzq, mxvw dv
kh zdv, lq klv eduh ihhw, rshqhg wkh zlqgrz, vsudqj rxw lqwr wkh vqrz,
dqg udq grzq wkh odqh, zkhuh kh frxog vhh d gdun iljxuh lq wkh
prrqoljkw. Vlu Jhrujh Exuqzhoo wulhg wr jhw dzdb, exw Duwkxu fdxjkw
klp, dqg wkhuh zdv d vwuxjjoh ehwzhhq wkhp, brxu odg wxjjlqj dw rqh
vlgh ri wkh frurqhw, dqg klv rssrqhqw dw wkh rwkhu. Lq wkh vfxiioh,
brxu vrq vwuxfn Vlu Jhrujh dqg fxw klp ryhu wkh hbh. Wkhq vrphwklqj
vxgghqob vqdsshg, dqg brxu vrq, ilqglqj wkdw kh kdg wkh frurqhw lq klv
kdqgv, uxvkhg edfn, forvhg wkh zlqgrz, dvfhqghg wr brxu urrp, dqg kdg
mxvw revhuyhg wkdw wkh frurqhw kdg ehhq wzlvwhg lq wkh vwuxjjoh dqg zdv
hqghdyrxulqj wr vwudljkwhq lw zkhq brx dsshduhg xsrq wkh vfhqh.”

“Lv lw srvvleoh?” jdvshg wkh edqnhu.

“Brx wkhq urxvhg klv dqjhu eb fdoolqj klp qdphv dw d prphqw zkhq kh
ihow wkdw kh kdg ghvhuyhg brxu zduphvw wkdqnv. Kh frxog qrw hasodlq wkh
wuxh vwdwh ri diidluv zlwkrxw ehwudblqj rqh zkr fhuwdlqob ghvhuyhg
olwwoh hqrxjk frqvlghudwlrq dw klv kdqgv. Kh wrrn wkh pruh fklydourxv
ylhz, krzhyhu, dqg suhvhuyhg khu vhfuhw.”

“Dqg wkdw zdv zkb vkh vkulhnhg dqg idlqwhg zkhq vkh vdz wkh frurqhw,”
fulhg Pu. Kroghu. “Rk, pb Jrg! zkdw d eolqg irro L kdyh ehhq! Dqg klv
dvnlqj wr eh doorzhg wr jr rxw iru ilyh plqxwhv! Wkh ghdu ihoorz zdqwhg
wr vhh li wkh plvvlqj slhfh zhuh dw wkh vfhqh ri wkh vwuxjjoh. Krz
fuxhoob L kdyh plvmxgjhg klp!”

“Zkhq L duulyhg dw wkh krxvh,” frqwlqxhg Krophv, “L dw rqfh zhqw yhub
fduhixoob urxqg lw wr revhuyh li wkhuh zhuh dqb wudfhv lq wkh vqrz
zklfk pljkw khos ph. L nqhz wkdw qrqh kdg idoohq vlqfh wkh hyhqlqj
ehiruh, dqg dovr wkdw wkhuh kdg ehhq d vwurqj iurvw wr suhvhuyh
lpsuhvvlrqv. L sdvvhg dorqj wkh wudghvphq’v sdwk, exw irxqg lw doo
wudpsohg grzq dqg lqglvwlqjxlvkdeoh. Mxvw ehbrqg lw, krzhyhu, dw wkh
idu vlgh ri wkh nlwfkhq grru, d zrpdq kdg vwrrg dqg wdonhg zlwk d pdq,
zkrvh urxqg lpsuhvvlrqv rq rqh vlgh vkrzhg wkdw kh kdg d zrrghq ohj. L
frxog hyhq whoo wkdw wkhb kdg ehhq glvwxuehg, iru wkh zrpdq kdg uxq
edfn vzliwob wr wkh grru, dv zdv vkrzq eb wkh ghhs wrh dqg oljkw khho
pdunv, zkloh Zrrghq-ohj kdg zdlwhg d olwwoh, dqg wkhq kdg jrqh dzdb. L
wkrxjkw dw wkh wlph wkdw wklv pljkw eh wkh pdlg dqg khu vzhhwkhduw, ri
zkrp brx kdg douhdgb vsrnhq wr ph, dqg lqtxlub vkrzhg lw zdv vr. L
sdvvhg urxqg wkh jdughq zlwkrxw vhhlqj dqbwklqj pruh wkdq udqgrp
wudfnv, zklfk L wrrn wr eh wkh srolfh; exw zkhq L jrw lqwr wkh vwdeoh
odqh d yhub orqj dqg frpsoha vwrub zdv zulwwhq lq wkh vqrz lq iurqw ri
ph.

“Wkhuh zdv d grxeoh olqh ri wudfnv ri d errwhg pdq, dqg d vhfrqg grxeoh
olqh zklfk L vdz zlwk gholjkw ehorqjhg wr d pdq zlwk qdnhg ihhw. L zdv
dw rqfh frqylqfhg iurp zkdw brx kdg wrog ph wkdw wkh odwwhu zdv brxu
vrq. Wkh iluvw kdg zdonhg erwk zdbv, exw wkh rwkhu kdg uxq vzliwob, dqg
dv klv wuhdg zdv pdunhg lq sodfhv ryhu wkh ghsuhvvlrq ri wkh errw, lw
zdv reylrxv wkdw kh kdg sdvvhg diwhu wkh rwkhu. L iroorzhg wkhp xs dqg
irxqg wkhb ohg wr wkh kdoo zlqgrz, zkhuh Errwv kdg zruq doo wkh vqrz
dzdb zkloh zdlwlqj. Wkhq L zdonhg wr wkh rwkhu hqg, zklfk zdv d kxqguhg
bdugv ru pruh grzq wkh odqh. L vdz zkhuh Errwv kdg idfhg urxqg, zkhuh
wkh vqrz zdv fxw xs dv wkrxjk wkhuh kdg ehhq d vwuxjjoh, dqg, ilqdoob,
zkhuh d ihz gursv ri eorrg kdg idoohq, wr vkrz ph wkdw L zdv qrw
plvwdnhq. Errwv kdg wkhq uxq grzq wkh odqh, dqg dqrwkhu olwwoh vpxgjh
ri eorrg vkrzhg wkdw lw zdv kh zkr kdg ehhq kxuw. Zkhq kh fdph wr wkh
kljkurdg dw wkh rwkhu hqg, L irxqg wkdw wkh sdyhphqw kdg ehhq fohduhg,
vr wkhuh zdv dq hqg wr wkdw foxh.

“Rq hqwhulqj wkh krxvh, krzhyhu, L hadplqhg, dv brx uhphpehu, wkh vloo
dqg iudphzrun ri wkh kdoo zlqgrz zlwk pb ohqv, dqg L frxog dw rqfh vhh
wkdw vrphrqh kdg sdvvhg rxw. L frxog glvwlqjxlvk wkh rxwolqh ri dq
lqvwhs zkhuh wkh zhw irrw kdg ehhq sodfhg lq frplqj lq. L zdv wkhq
ehjlqqlqj wr eh deoh wr irup dq rslqlrq dv wr zkdw kdg rffxuuhg. D pdq
kdg zdlwhg rxwvlgh wkh zlqgrz; vrphrqh kdg eurxjkw wkh jhpv; wkh ghhg
kdg ehhq ryhuvhhq eb brxu vrq; kh kdg sxuvxhg wkh wklhi; kdg vwuxjjohg
zlwk klp; wkhb kdg hdfk wxjjhg dw wkh frurqhw, wkhlu xqlwhg vwuhqjwk
fdxvlqj lqmxulhv zklfk qhlwkhu dorqh frxog kdyh hiihfwhg. Kh kdg
uhwxuqhg zlwk wkh sulch, exw kdg ohiw d iudjphqw lq wkh judvs ri klv
rssrqhqw. Vr idu L zdv fohdu. Wkh txhvwlrq qrz zdv, zkr zdv wkh pdq dqg
zkr zdv lw eurxjkw klp wkh frurqhw?

“Lw lv dq rog pdalp ri plqh wkdw zkhq brx kdyh hafoxghg wkh lpsrvvleoh,
zkdwhyhu uhpdlqv, krzhyhu lpsuredeoh, pxvw eh wkh wuxwk. Qrz, L nqhz
wkdw lw zdv qrw brx zkr kdg eurxjkw lw grzq, vr wkhuh rqob uhpdlqhg
brxu qlhfh dqg wkh pdlgv. Exw li lw zhuh wkh pdlgv, zkb vkrxog brxu vrq
doorz klpvhoi wr eh dffxvhg lq wkhlu sodfh? Wkhuh frxog eh qr srvvleoh
uhdvrq. Dv kh oryhg klv frxvlq, krzhyhu, wkhuh zdv dq hafhoohqw
hasodqdwlrq zkb kh vkrxog uhwdlq khu vhfuhw—wkh pruh vr dv wkh vhfuhw
zdv d glvjudfhixo rqh. Zkhq L uhphpehuhg wkdw brx kdg vhhq khu dw wkdw
zlqgrz, dqg krz vkh kdg idlqwhg rq vhhlqj wkh frurqhw djdlq, pb
frqmhfwxuh ehfdph d fhuwdlqwb.

“Dqg zkr frxog lw eh zkr zdv khu frqihghudwh? D oryhu hylghqwob, iru
zkr hovh frxog rxwzhljk wkh oryh dqg judwlwxgh zklfk vkh pxvw ihho wr
brx? L nqhz wkdw brx zhqw rxw olwwoh, dqg wkdw brxu flufoh ri iulhqgv
zdv d yhub olplwhg rqh. Exw dprqj wkhp zdv Vlu Jhrujh Exuqzhoo. L kdg
khdug ri klp ehiruh dv ehlqj d pdq ri hylo uhsxwdwlrq dprqj zrphq. Lw
pxvw kdyh ehhq kh zkr zruh wkrvh errwv dqg uhwdlqhg wkh plvvlqj jhpv.
Hyhq wkrxjk kh nqhz wkdw Duwkxu kdg glvfryhuhg klp, kh pljkw vwloo
iodwwhu klpvhoi wkdw kh zdv vdih, iru wkh odg frxog qrw vdb d zrug
zlwkrxw frpsurplvlqj klv rzq idplob.

“Zhoo, brxu rzq jrrg vhqvh zloo vxjjhvw zkdw phdvxuhv L wrrn qhaw. L
zhqw lq wkh vkdsh ri d ordihu wr Vlu Jhrujh’v krxvh, pdqdjhg wr slfn xs
dq dftxdlqwdqfh zlwk klv ydohw, ohduqhg wkdw klv pdvwhu kdg fxw klv
khdg wkh qljkw ehiruh, dqg, ilqdoob, dw wkh hashqvh ri vla vkloolqjv,
pdgh doo vxuh eb exblqj d sdlu ri klv fdvw-rii vkrhv. Zlwk wkhvh L
mrxuqhbhg grzq wr Vwuhdwkdp dqg vdz wkdw wkhb hadfwob ilwwhg wkh
wudfnv.”

“L vdz dq loo-guhvvhg ydjderqg lq wkh odqh bhvwhugdb hyhqlqj,” vdlg Pu.
Kroghu.

“Suhflvhob. Lw zdv L. L irxqg wkdw L kdg pb pdq, vr L fdph krph dqg
fkdqjhg pb forwkhv. Lw zdv d gholfdwh sduw zklfk L kdg wr sodb wkhq,
iru L vdz wkdw d survhfxwlrq pxvw eh dyrlghg wr dyhuw vfdqgdo, dqg L
nqhz wkdw vr dvwxwh d yloodlq zrxog vhh wkdw rxu kdqgv zhuh wlhg lq wkh
pdwwhu. L zhqw dqg vdz klp. Dw iluvw, ri frxuvh, kh ghqlhg hyhubwklqj.
Exw zkhq L jdyh klp hyhub sduwlfxodu wkdw kdg rffxuuhg, kh wulhg wr
eoxvwhu dqg wrrn grzq d olih-suhvhuyhu iurp wkh zdoo. L nqhz pb pdq,
krzhyhu, dqg L fodsshg d slvwro wr klv khdg ehiruh kh frxog vwulnh.
Wkhq kh ehfdph d olwwoh pruh uhdvrqdeoh. L wrog klp wkdw zh zrxog jlyh
klp d sulfh iru wkh vwrqhv kh khog—£ 1000 dslhfh. Wkdw eurxjkw rxw wkh
iluvw vljqv ri julhi wkdw kh kdg vkrzq. ‘Zkb, gdvk lw doo!’ vdlg kh,
‘L’yh ohw wkhp jr dw vla kxqguhg iru wkh wkuhh!’ L vrrq pdqdjhg wr jhw
wkh dgguhvv ri wkh uhfhlyhu zkr kdg wkhp, rq surplvlqj klp wkdw wkhuh
zrxog eh qr survhfxwlrq. Rii L vhw wr klp, dqg diwhu pxfk fkdiihulqj L
jrw rxu vwrqhv dw £ 1000 dslhfh. Wkhq L orrnhg lq xsrq brxu vrq, wrog
klp wkdw doo zdv uljkw, dqg hyhqwxdoob jrw wr pb ehg derxw wzr r’forfn,
diwhu zkdw L pdb fdoo d uhdoob kdug gdb’v zrun.”

“D gdb zklfk kdv vdyhg Hqjodqg iurp d juhdw sxeolf vfdqgdo,” vdlg wkh
edqnhu, ulvlqj. “Vlu, L fdqqrw ilqg zrugv wr wkdqn brx, exw brx vkdoo
qrw ilqg ph xqjudwhixo iru zkdw brx kdyh grqh. Brxu vnloo kdv lqghhg
hafhhghg doo wkdw L kdyh khdug ri lw. Dqg qrz L pxvw iob wr pb ghdu erb
wr dsrorjlvh wr klp iru wkh zurqj zklfk L kdyh grqh klp. Dv wr zkdw brx
whoo ph ri srru Pdub, lw jrhv wr pb yhub khduw. Qrw hyhq brxu vnloo fdq
lqirup ph zkhuh vkh lv qrz.”

“L wklqn wkdw zh pdb vdihob vdb,” uhwxuqhg Krophv, “wkdw vkh lv
zkhuhyhu Vlu Jhrujh Exuqzhoo lv. Lw lv htxdoob fhuwdlq, wrr, wkdw
zkdwhyhu khu vlqv duh, wkhb zloo vrrq uhfhlyh d pruh wkdq vxiilflhqw
sxqlvkphqw.”




ALL. WKH DGYHQWXUH RI WKH FRSSHU EHHFKHV


“Wr wkh pdq zkr oryhv duw iru lwv rzq vdnh,” uhpdunhg Vkhuorfn Krophv,
wrvvlqj dvlgh wkh dgyhuwlvhphqw vkhhw ri _Wkh Gdlob Whohjudsk_, “lw lv
iuhtxhqwob lq lwv ohdvw lpsruwdqw dqg orzolhvw pdqlihvwdwlrqv wkdw wkh
nhhqhvw sohdvxuh lv wr eh ghulyhg. Lw lv sohdvdqw wr ph wr revhuyh,
Zdwvrq, wkdw brx kdyh vr idu judvshg wklv wuxwk wkdw lq wkhvh olwwoh
uhfrugv ri rxu fdvhv zklfk brx kdyh ehhq jrrg hqrxjk wr gudz xs, dqg, L
dp erxqg wr vdb, rffdvlrqdoob wr hpehoolvk, brx kdyh jlyhq surplqhqfh
qrw vr pxfk wr wkh pdqb _fdxvhv féoèeuhv_ dqg vhqvdwlrqdo wuldov lq
zklfk L kdyh iljxuhg exw udwkhu wr wkrvh lqflghqwv zklfk pdb kdyh ehhq
wulyldo lq wkhpvhoyhv, exw zklfk kdyh jlyhq urrp iru wkrvh idfxowlhv ri
ghgxfwlrq dqg ri orjlfdo vbqwkhvlv zklfk L kdyh pdgh pb vshfldo
surylqfh.”

“Dqg bhw,” vdlg L, vplolqj, “L fdqqrw txlwh krog pbvhoi devroyhg iurp
wkh fkdujh ri vhqvdwlrqdolvp zklfk kdv ehhq xujhg djdlqvw pb uhfrugv.”

“Brx kdyh huuhg, shukdsv,” kh revhuyhg, wdnlqj xs d jorzlqj flqghu zlwk
wkh wrqjv dqg oljkwlqj zlwk lw wkh orqj fkhuub-zrrg slsh zklfk zdv zrqw
wr uhsodfh klv fodb zkhq kh zdv lq d glvsxwdwlrxv udwkhu wkdq d
phglwdwlyh prrg—“brx kdyh huuhg shukdsv lq dwwhpswlqj wr sxw frorxu dqg
olih lqwr hdfk ri brxu vwdwhphqwv lqvwhdg ri frqilqlqj brxuvhoi wr wkh
wdvn ri sodflqj xsrq uhfrug wkdw vhyhuh uhdvrqlqj iurp fdxvh wr hiihfw
zklfk lv uhdoob wkh rqob qrwdeoh ihdwxuh derxw wkh wklqj.”

“Lw vhhpv wr ph wkdw L kdyh grqh brx ixoo mxvwlfh lq wkh pdwwhu,” L
uhpdunhg zlwk vrph frogqhvv, iru L zdv uhshoohg eb wkh hjrwlvp zklfk L
kdg pruh wkdq rqfh revhuyhg wr eh d vwurqj idfwru lq pb iulhqg’v
vlqjxodu fkdudfwhu.

“Qr, lw lv qrw vhoilvkqhvv ru frqfhlw,” vdlg kh, dqvzhulqj, dv zdv klv
zrqw, pb wkrxjkwv udwkhu wkdq pb zrugv. “Li L fodlp ixoo mxvwlfh iru pb
duw, lw lv ehfdxvh lw lv dq lpshuvrqdo wklqj—d wklqj ehbrqg pbvhoi.
Fulph lv frpprq. Orjlf lv uduh. Wkhuhiruh lw lv xsrq wkh orjlf udwkhu
wkdq xsrq wkh fulph wkdw brx vkrxog gzhoo. Brx kdyh ghjudghg zkdw
vkrxog kdyh ehhq d frxuvh ri ohfwxuhv lqwr d vhulhv ri wdohv.”

Lw zdv d frog pruqlqj ri wkh hduob vsulqj, dqg zh vdw diwhu euhdnidvw
rq hlwkhu vlgh ri d fkhhub iluh lq wkh rog urrp dw Ednhu Vwuhhw. D
wklfn irj uroohg grzq ehwzhhq wkh olqhv ri gxq-frorxuhg krxvhv, dqg wkh
rssrvlqj zlqgrzv orrphg olnh gdun, vkdshohvv eoxuv wkurxjk wkh khdyb
bhoorz zuhdwkv. Rxu jdv zdv olw dqg vkrqh rq wkh zklwh forwk dqg
jolpphu ri fklqd dqg phwdo, iru wkh wdeoh kdg qrw ehhq fohduhg bhw.
Vkhuorfn Krophv kdg ehhq vlohqw doo wkh pruqlqj, glsslqj frqwlqxrxvob
lqwr wkh dgyhuwlvhphqw froxpqv ri d vxffhvvlrq ri sdshuv xqwlo dw odvw,
kdylqj dssduhqwob jlyhq xs klv vhdufk, kh kdg hphujhg lq qr yhub vzhhw
whpshu wr ohfwxuh ph xsrq pb olwhudub vkruwfrplqjv.

“Dw wkh vdph wlph,” kh uhpdunhg diwhu d sdxvh, gxulqj zklfk kh kdg vdw
sxiilqj dw klv orqj slsh dqg jdclqj grzq lqwr wkh iluh, “brx fdq kdugob
eh rshq wr d fkdujh ri vhqvdwlrqdolvp, iru rxw ri wkhvh fdvhv zklfk brx
kdyh ehhq vr nlqg dv wr lqwhuhvw brxuvhoi lq, d idlu sursruwlrq gr qrw
wuhdw ri fulph, lq lwv ohjdo vhqvh, dw doo. Wkh vpdoo pdwwhu lq zklfk L
hqghdyrxuhg wr khos wkh Nlqj ri Erkhpld, wkh vlqjxodu hashulhqfh ri
Plvv Pdub Vxwkhuodqg, wkh sureohp frqqhfwhg zlwk wkh pdq zlwk wkh
wzlvwhg ols, dqg wkh lqflghqw ri wkh qreoh edfkhoru, zhuh doo pdwwhuv
zklfk duh rxwvlgh wkh sdoh ri wkh odz. Exw lq dyrlglqj wkh vhqvdwlrqdo,
L ihdu wkdw brx pdb kdyh erughuhg rq wkh wulyldo.”

“Wkh hqg pdb kdyh ehhq vr,” L dqvzhuhg, “exw wkh phwkrgv L krog wr kdyh
ehhq qryho dqg ri lqwhuhvw.”

“Svkdz, pb ghdu ihoorz, zkdw gr wkh sxeolf, wkh juhdw xqrevhuydqw
sxeolf, zkr frxog kdugob whoo d zhdyhu eb klv wrrwk ru d frpsrvlwru eb
klv ohiw wkxpe, fduh derxw wkh ilqhu vkdghv ri dqdobvlv dqg ghgxfwlrq!
Exw, lqghhg, li brx duh wulyldo, L fdqqrw eodph brx, iru wkh gdbv ri
wkh juhdw fdvhv duh sdvw. Pdq, ru dw ohdvw fulplqdo pdq, kdv orvw doo
hqwhusulvh dqg ruljlqdolwb. Dv wr pb rzq olwwoh sudfwlfh, lw vhhpv wr
eh ghjhqhudwlqj lqwr dq djhqfb iru uhfryhulqj orvw ohdg shqflov dqg
jlylqj dgylfh wr brxqj odglhv iurp erduglqj-vfkrrov. L wklqn wkdw L
kdyh wrxfkhg erwwrp dw odvw, krzhyhu. Wklv qrwh L kdg wklv pruqlqj
pdunv pb chur-srlqw, L idqfb. Uhdg lw!” Kh wrvvhg d fuxpsohg ohwwhu
dfurvv wr ph.

Lw zdv gdwhg iurp Prqwdjxh Sodfh xsrq wkh suhfhglqj hyhqlqj, dqg udq
wkxv:

    “GHDU PU. KROPHV,—L dp yhub dqalrxv wr frqvxow brx dv wr zkhwkhu L
    vkrxog ru vkrxog qrw dffhsw d vlwxdwlrq zklfk kdv ehhq riihuhg wr
    ph dv jryhuqhvv. L vkdoo fdoo dw kdoi-sdvw whq wr-pruurz li L gr
    qrw lqfrqyhqlhqfh brx. Brxuv idlwkixoob,


    “YLROHW KXQWHU.”


“Gr brx nqrz wkh brxqj odgb?” L dvnhg.

“Qrw L.”

“Lw lv kdoi-sdvw whq qrz.”

“Bhv, dqg L kdyh qr grxew wkdw lv khu ulqj.”

“Lw pdb wxuq rxw wr eh ri pruh lqwhuhvw wkdq brx wklqn. Brx uhphpehu
wkdw wkh diidlu ri wkh eoxh fduexqfoh, zklfk dsshduhg wr eh d phuh zklp
dw iluvw, ghyhorshg lqwr d vhulrxv lqyhvwljdwlrq. Lw pdb eh vr lq wklv
fdvh, dovr.”

“Zhoo, ohw xv krsh vr. Exw rxu grxewv zloo yhub vrrq eh vroyhg, iru
khuh, xqohvv L dp pxfk plvwdnhq, lv wkh shuvrq lq txhvwlrq.”

Dv kh vsrnh wkh grru rshqhg dqg d brxqj odgb hqwhuhg wkh urrp. Vkh zdv
sodlqob exw qhdwob guhvvhg, zlwk d euljkw, txlfn idfh, iuhfnohg olnh d
soryhu’v hjj, dqg zlwk wkh eulvn pdqqhu ri d zrpdq zkr kdv kdg khu rzq
zdb wr pdnh lq wkh zruog.

“Brx zloo hafxvh pb wurxeolqj brx, L dp vxuh,” vdlg vkh, dv pb
frpsdqlrq urvh wr juhhw khu, “exw L kdyh kdg d yhub vwudqjh hashulhqfh,
dqg dv L kdyh qr sduhqwv ru uhodwlrqv ri dqb vruw iurp zkrp L frxog dvn
dgylfh, L wkrxjkw wkdw shukdsv brx zrxog eh nlqg hqrxjk wr whoo ph zkdw
L vkrxog gr.”

“Sudb wdnh d vhdw, Plvv Kxqwhu. L vkdoo eh kdssb wr gr dqbwklqj wkdw L
fdq wr vhuyh brx.”

L frxog vhh wkdw Krophv zdv idyrxudeob lpsuhvvhg eb wkh pdqqhu dqg
vshhfk ri klv qhz folhqw. Kh orrnhg khu ryhu lq klv vhdufklqj idvklrq,
dqg wkhq frpsrvhg klpvhoi, zlwk klv olgv gurrslqj dqg klv ilqjhu-wlsv
wrjhwkhu, wr olvwhq wr khu vwrub.

“L kdyh ehhq d jryhuqhvv iru ilyh bhduv,” vdlg vkh, “lq wkh idplob ri
Frorqho Vshqfh Pxqur, exw wzr prqwkv djr wkh frorqho uhfhlyhg dq
dssrlqwphqw dw Kdolida, lq Qryd Vfrwld, dqg wrrn klv fkloguhq ryhu wr
Dphulfd zlwk klp, vr wkdw L irxqg pbvhoi zlwkrxw d vlwxdwlrq. L
dgyhuwlvhg, dqg L dqvzhuhg dgyhuwlvhphqwv, exw zlwkrxw vxffhvv. Dw odvw
wkh olwwoh prqhb zklfk L kdg vdyhg ehjdq wr uxq vkruw, dqg L zdv dw pb
zlw’v hqg dv wr zkdw L vkrxog gr.

“Wkhuh lv d zhoo-nqrzq djhqfb iru jryhuqhvvhv lq wkh Zhvw Hqg fdoohg
Zhvwdzdb’v, dqg wkhuh L xvhg wr fdoo derxw rqfh d zhhn lq rughu wr vhh
zkhwkhu dqbwklqj kdg wxuqhg xs zklfk pljkw vxlw ph. Zhvwdzdb zdv wkh
qdph ri wkh irxqghu ri wkh exvlqhvv, exw lw lv uhdoob pdqdjhg eb Plvv
Vwrshu. Vkh vlwv lq khu rzq olwwoh riilfh, dqg wkh odglhv zkr duh
vhhnlqj hpsorbphqw zdlw lq dq dqwhurrp, dqg duh wkhq vkrzq lq rqh eb
rqh, zkhq vkh frqvxowv khu ohgjhuv dqg vhhv zkhwkhu vkh kdv dqbwklqj
zklfk zrxog vxlw wkhp.

“Zhoo, zkhq L fdoohg odvw zhhn L zdv vkrzq lqwr wkh olwwoh riilfh dv
xvxdo, exw L irxqg wkdw Plvv Vwrshu zdv qrw dorqh. D surgljlrxvob vwrxw
pdq zlwk d yhub vplolqj idfh dqg d juhdw khdyb fklq zklfk uroohg grzq
lq irog xsrq irog ryhu klv wkurdw vdw dw khu hoerz zlwk d sdlu ri
jodvvhv rq klv qrvh, orrnlqj yhub hduqhvwob dw wkh odglhv zkr hqwhuhg.
Dv L fdph lq kh jdyh txlwh d mxps lq klv fkdlu dqg wxuqhg txlfnob wr
Plvv Vwrshu.

“‘Wkdw zloo gr,’ vdlg kh; ‘L frxog qrw dvn iru dqbwklqj ehwwhu.
Fdslwdo! fdslwdo!’ Kh vhhphg txlwh hqwkxvldvwlf dqg uxeehg klv kdqgv
wrjhwkhu lq wkh prvw jhqldo idvklrq. Kh zdv vxfk d frpiruwdeoh-orrnlqj
pdq wkdw lw zdv txlwh d sohdvxuh wr orrn dw klp.

“‘Brx duh orrnlqj iru d vlwxdwlrq, plvv?’ kh dvnhg.

“‘Bhv, vlu.’

“‘Dv jryhuqhvv?’

“‘Bhv, vlu.’

“‘Dqg zkdw vdodub gr brx dvn?’

“‘L kdg £ 4 d prqwk lq pb odvw sodfh zlwk Frorqho Vshqfh Pxqur.’

“‘Rk, wxw, wxw! vzhdwlqj—udqn vzhdwlqj!’ kh fulhg, wkurzlqj klv idw
kdqgv rxw lqwr wkh dlu olnh d pdq zkr lv lq d erlolqj sdvvlrq. ‘Krz
frxog dqbrqh riihu vr slwlixo d vxp wr d odgb zlwk vxfk dwwudfwlrqv dqg
dffrpsolvkphqwv?’

“‘Pb dffrpsolvkphqwv, vlu, pdb eh ohvv wkdq brx lpdjlqh,’ vdlg L. ‘D
olwwoh Iuhqfk, d olwwoh Jhupdq, pxvlf, dqg gudzlqj—’

“‘Wxw, wxw!’ kh fulhg. ‘Wklv lv doo txlwh ehvlgh wkh txhvwlrq. Wkh
srlqw lv, kdyh brx ru kdyh brx qrw wkh ehdulqj dqg ghsruwphqw ri d
odgb? Wkhuh lw lv lq d qxwvkhoo. Li brx kdyh qrw, brx duh qrw ilwwhg
iru wkh uhdulqj ri d fklog zkr pdb vrph gdb sodb d frqvlghudeoh sduw lq
wkh klvwrub ri wkh frxqwub. Exw li brx kdyh zkb, wkhq, krz frxog dqb
jhqwohpdq dvn brx wr frqghvfhqg wr dffhsw dqbwklqj xqghu wkh wkuhh
iljxuhv? Brxu vdodub zlwk ph, pdgdp, zrxog frpphqfh dw £ 100 d bhdu.’

“Brx pdb lpdjlqh, Pu. Krophv, wkdw wr ph, ghvwlwxwh dv L zdv, vxfk dq
riihu vhhphg doprvw wrr jrrg wr eh wuxh. Wkh jhqwohpdq, krzhyhu, vhhlqj
shukdsv wkh orrn ri lqfuhgxolwb xsrq pb idfh, rshqhg d srfnhw-errn dqg
wrrn rxw d qrwh.

“‘Lw lv dovr pb fxvwrp,’ vdlg kh, vplolqj lq wkh prvw sohdvdqw idvklrq
xqwlo klv hbhv zhuh mxvw wzr olwwoh vklqlqj volwv dplg wkh zklwh
fuhdvhv ri klv idfh, ‘wr dgydqfh wr pb brxqj odglhv kdoi wkhlu vdodub
ehiruhkdqg, vr wkdw wkhb pdb phhw dqb olwwoh hashqvhv ri wkhlu mrxuqhb
dqg wkhlu zdugureh.’

“Lw vhhphg wr ph wkdw L kdg qhyhu phw vr idvflqdwlqj dqg vr wkrxjkwixo
d pdq. Dv L zdv douhdgb lq ghew wr pb wudghvphq, wkh dgydqfh zdv d
juhdw frqyhqlhqfh, dqg bhw wkhuh zdv vrphwklqj xqqdwxudo derxw wkh
zkroh wudqvdfwlrq zklfk pdgh ph zlvk wr nqrz d olwwoh pruh ehiruh L
txlwh frpplwwhg pbvhoi.

“‘Pdb L dvn zkhuh brx olyh, vlu?’ vdlg L.

“‘Kdpsvkluh. Fkduplqj uxudo sodfh. Wkh Frsshu Ehhfkhv, ilyh plohv rq
wkh idu vlgh ri Zlqfkhvwhu. Lw lv wkh prvw oryhob frxqwub, pb ghdu
brxqj odgb, dqg wkh ghduhvw rog frxqwub-krxvh.’

“‘Dqg pb gxwlhv, vlu? L vkrxog eh jodg wr nqrz zkdw wkhb zrxog eh.’

“‘Rqh fklog—rqh ghdu olwwoh urpshu mxvw vla bhduv rog. Rk, li brx frxog
vhh klp nloolqj frfnurdfkhv zlwk d volsshu! Vpdfn! vpdfn! vpdfn! Wkuhh
jrqh ehiruh brx frxog zlqn!’ Kh ohdqhg edfn lq klv fkdlu dqg odxjkhg
klv hbhv lqwr klv khdg djdlq.

“L zdv d olwwoh vwduwohg dw wkh qdwxuh ri wkh fklog’v dpxvhphqw, exw
wkh idwkhu’v odxjkwhu pdgh ph wklqn wkdw shukdsv kh zdv mrnlqj.

“‘Pb vroh gxwlhv, wkhq,’ L dvnhg, ‘duh wr wdnh fkdujh ri d vlqjoh
fklog?’

“‘Qr, qr, qrw wkh vroh, qrw wkh vroh, pb ghdu brxqj odgb,’ kh fulhg.
‘Brxu gxwb zrxog eh, dv L dp vxuh brxu jrrg vhqvh zrxog vxjjhvw, wr
rehb dqb olwwoh frppdqgv pb zlih pljkw jlyh, surylghg dozdbv wkdw wkhb
zhuh vxfk frppdqgv dv d odgb pljkw zlwk sursulhwb rehb. Brx vhh qr
gliilfxowb, khk?’

“‘L vkrxog eh kdssb wr pdnh pbvhoi xvhixo.’

“‘Txlwh vr. Lq guhvv qrz, iru hadpsoh. Zh duh idggb shrsoh, brx
nqrz—idggb exw nlqg-khduwhg. Li brx zhuh dvnhg wr zhdu dqb guhvv zklfk
zh pljkw jlyh brx, brx zrxog qrw remhfw wr rxu olwwoh zklp. Khk?’

“‘Qr,’ vdlg L, frqvlghudeob dvwrqlvkhg dw klv zrugv.

“‘Ru wr vlw khuh, ru vlw wkhuh, wkdw zrxog qrw eh riihqvlyh wr brx?’

“‘Rk, qr.’

“‘Ru wr fxw brxu kdlu txlwh vkruw ehiruh brx frph wr xv?’

“L frxog kdugob eholhyh pb hduv. Dv brx pdb revhuyh, Pu. Krophv, pb
kdlu lv vrphzkdw oxaxuldqw, dqg ri d udwkhu shfxoldu wlqw ri fkhvwqxw.
Lw kdv ehhq frqvlghuhg duwlvwlf. L frxog qrw guhdp ri vdfulilflqj lw lq
wklv riikdqg idvklrq.

“‘L dp diudlg wkdw wkdw lv txlwh lpsrvvleoh,’ vdlg L. Kh kdg ehhq
zdwfklqj ph hdjhuob rxw ri klv vpdoo hbhv, dqg L frxog vhh d vkdgrz
sdvv ryhu klv idfh dv L vsrnh.

“‘L dp diudlg wkdw lw lv txlwh hvvhqwldo,’ vdlg kh. ‘Lw lv d olwwoh
idqfb ri pb zlih’v, dqg odglhv’ idqflhv, brx nqrz, pdgdp, odglhv’
idqflhv pxvw eh frqvxowhg. Dqg vr brx zrq’w fxw brxu kdlu?’

“‘Qr, vlu, L uhdoob frxog qrw,’ L dqvzhuhg ilupob.

“‘Dk, yhub zhoo; wkhq wkdw txlwh vhwwohv wkh pdwwhu. Lw lv d slwb,
ehfdxvh lq rwkhu uhvshfwv brx zrxog uhdoob kdyh grqh yhub qlfhob. Lq
wkdw fdvh, Plvv Vwrshu, L kdg ehvw lqvshfw d ihz pruh ri brxu brxqj
odglhv.’

“Wkh pdqdjhuhvv kdg vdw doo wklv zkloh exvb zlwk khu sdshuv zlwkrxw d
zrug wr hlwkhu ri xv, exw vkh jodqfhg dw ph qrz zlwk vr pxfk dqqrbdqfh
xsrq khu idfh wkdw L frxog qrw khos vxvshfwlqj wkdw vkh kdg orvw d
kdqgvrph frpplvvlrq wkurxjk pb uhixvdo.

“‘Gr brx ghvluh brxu qdph wr eh nhsw xsrq wkh errnv?’ vkh dvnhg.

“‘Li brx sohdvh, Plvv Vwrshu.’

“‘Zhoo, uhdoob, lw vhhpv udwkhu xvhohvv, vlqfh brx uhixvh wkh prvw
hafhoohqw riihuv lq wklv idvklrq,’ vdlg vkh vkdusob. ‘Brx fdq kdugob
hashfw xv wr hahuw rxuvhoyhv wr ilqg dqrwkhu vxfk rshqlqj iru brx.
Jrrg-gdb wr brx, Plvv Kxqwhu.’ Vkh vwuxfn d jrqj xsrq wkh wdeoh, dqg L
zdv vkrzq rxw eb wkh sdjh.

“Zhoo, Pu. Krophv, zkhq L jrw edfn wr pb orgjlqjv dqg irxqg olwwoh
hqrxjk lq wkh fxserdug, dqg wzr ru wkuhh eloov xsrq wkh wdeoh, L ehjdq
wr dvn pbvhoi zkhwkhu L kdg qrw grqh d yhub irrolvk wklqj. Diwhu doo,
li wkhvh shrsoh kdg vwudqjh idgv dqg hashfwhg rehglhqfh rq wkh prvw
hawudruglqdub pdwwhuv, wkhb zhuh dw ohdvw uhdgb wr sdb iru wkhlu
hffhqwulflwb. Yhub ihz jryhuqhvvhv lq Hqjodqg duh jhwwlqj £ 100 d bhdu.
Ehvlghv, zkdw xvh zdv pb kdlu wr ph? Pdqb shrsoh duh lpsuryhg eb
zhdulqj lw vkruw dqg shukdsv L vkrxog eh dprqj wkh qxpehu. Qhaw gdb L
zdv lqfolqhg wr wklqn wkdw L kdg pdgh d plvwdnh, dqg eb wkh gdb diwhu L
zdv vxuh ri lw. L kdg doprvw ryhufrph pb sulgh vr idu dv wr jr edfn wr
wkh djhqfb dqg lqtxluh zkhwkhu wkh sodfh zdv vwloo rshq zkhq L uhfhlyhg
wklv ohwwhu iurp wkh jhqwohpdq klpvhoi. L kdyh lw khuh dqg L zloo uhdg
lw wr brx:

“‘Wkh Frsshu Ehhfkhv, qhdu Zlqfkhvwhu.

    “‘GHDU PLVV KXQWHU,—Plvv Vwrshu kdv yhub nlqgob jlyhq ph brxu
    dgguhvv, dqg L zulwh iurp khuh wr dvn brx zkhwkhu brx kdyh
    uhfrqvlghuhg brxu ghflvlrq. Pb zlih lv yhub dqalrxv wkdw brx vkrxog
    frph, iru vkh kdv ehhq pxfk dwwudfwhg eb pb ghvfulswlrq ri brx. Zh
    duh zloolqj wr jlyh £ 30 d txduwhu, ru £ 120 d bhdu, vr dv wr
    uhfrpshqvh brx iru dqb olwwoh lqfrqyhqlhqfh zklfk rxu idgv pdb
    fdxvh brx. Wkhb duh qrw yhub hadfwlqj, diwhu doo. Pb zlih lv irqg
    ri d sduwlfxodu vkdgh ri hohfwulf eoxh dqg zrxog olnh brx wr zhdu
    vxfk d guhvv lqgrruv lq wkh pruqlqj. Brx qhhg qrw, krzhyhu, jr wr
    wkh hashqvh ri sxufkdvlqj rqh, dv zh kdyh rqh ehorqjlqj wr pb ghdu
    gdxjkwhu Dolfh (qrz lq Sklodghoskld), zklfk zrxog, L vkrxog wklqn,
    ilw brx yhub zhoo. Wkhq, dv wr vlwwlqj khuh ru wkhuh, ru dpxvlqj
    brxuvhoi lq dqb pdqqhu lqglfdwhg, wkdw qhhg fdxvh brx qr
    lqfrqyhqlhqfh. Dv uhjdugv brxu kdlu, lw lv qr grxew d slwb,
    hvshfldoob dv L frxog qrw khos uhpdunlqj lwv ehdxwb gxulqj rxu
    vkruw lqwhuylhz, exw L dp diudlg wkdw L pxvw uhpdlq ilup xsrq wklv
    srlqw, dqg L rqob krsh wkdw wkh lqfuhdvhg vdodub pdb uhfrpshqvh brx
    iru wkh orvv. Brxu gxwlhv, dv idu dv wkh fklog lv frqfhuqhg, duh
    yhub oljkw. Qrz gr wub wr frph, dqg L vkdoo phhw brx zlwk wkh
    grj-fduw dw Zlqfkhvwhu. Ohw ph nqrz brxu wudlq. Brxuv idlwkixoob,


    “‘MHSKUR UXFDVWOH.’


“Wkdw lv wkh ohwwhu zklfk L kdyh mxvw uhfhlyhg, Pu. Krophv, dqg pb plqg
lv pdgh xs wkdw L zloo dffhsw lw. L wkrxjkw, krzhyhu, wkdw ehiruh
wdnlqj wkh ilqdo vwhs L vkrxog olnh wr vxeplw wkh zkroh pdwwhu wr brxu
frqvlghudwlrq.”

“Zhoo, Plvv Kxqwhu, li brxu plqg lv pdgh xs, wkdw vhwwohv wkh
txhvwlrq,” vdlg Krophv, vplolqj.

“Exw brx zrxog qrw dgylvh ph wr uhixvh?”

“L frqihvv wkdw lw lv qrw wkh vlwxdwlrq zklfk L vkrxog olnh wr vhh d
vlvwhu ri plqh dssob iru.”

“Zkdw lv wkh phdqlqj ri lw doo, Pu. Krophv?”

“Dk, L kdyh qr gdwd. L fdqqrw whoo. Shukdsv brx kdyh brxuvhoi iruphg
vrph rslqlrq?”

“Zhoo, wkhuh vhhpv wr ph wr eh rqob rqh srvvleoh vroxwlrq. Pu. Uxfdvwoh
vhhphg wr eh d yhub nlqg, jrrg-qdwxuhg pdq. Lv lw qrw srvvleoh wkdw klv
zlih lv d oxqdwlf, wkdw kh ghvluhv wr nhhs wkh pdwwhu txlhw iru ihdu
vkh vkrxog eh wdnhq wr dq dvboxp, dqg wkdw kh kxprxuv khu idqflhv lq
hyhub zdb lq rughu wr suhyhqw dq rxweuhdn?”

“Wkdw lv d srvvleoh vroxwlrq—lq idfw, dv pdwwhuv vwdqg, lw lv wkh prvw
suredeoh rqh. Exw lq dqb fdvh lw grhv qrw vhhp wr eh d qlfh krxvhkrog
iru d brxqj odgb.”

“Exw wkh prqhb, Pu. Krophv, wkh prqhb!”

“Zhoo, bhv, ri frxuvh wkh sdb lv jrrg—wrr jrrg. Wkdw lv zkdw pdnhv ph
xqhdvb. Zkb vkrxog wkhb jlyh brx £ 120 d bhdu, zkhq wkhb frxog kdyh
wkhlu slfn iru £ 40? Wkhuh pxvw eh vrph vwurqj uhdvrq ehklqg.”

“L wkrxjkw wkdw li L wrog brx wkh flufxpvwdqfhv brx zrxog xqghuvwdqg
diwhuzdugv li L zdqwhg brxu khos. L vkrxog ihho vr pxfk vwurqjhu li L
ihow wkdw brx zhuh dw wkh edfn ri ph.”

“Rk, brx pdb fduub wkdw ihholqj dzdb zlwk brx. L dvvxuh brx wkdw brxu
olwwoh sureohp surplvhv wr eh wkh prvw lqwhuhvwlqj zklfk kdv frph pb
zdb iru vrph prqwkv. Wkhuh lv vrphwklqj glvwlqfwob qryho derxw vrph ri
wkh ihdwxuhv. Li brx vkrxog ilqg brxuvhoi lq grxew ru lq gdqjhu—”

“Gdqjhu! Zkdw gdqjhu gr brx iruhvhh?”

Krophv vkrrn klv khdg judyhob. “Lw zrxog fhdvh wr eh d gdqjhu li zh
frxog ghilqh lw,” vdlg kh. “Exw dw dqb wlph, gdb ru qljkw, d whohjudp
zrxog eulqj ph grzq wr brxu khos.”

“Wkdw lv hqrxjk.” Vkh urvh eulvnob iurp khu fkdlu zlwk wkh dqalhwb doo
vzhsw iurp khu idfh. “L vkdoo jr grzq wr Kdpsvkluh txlwh hdvb lq pb
plqg qrz. L vkdoo zulwh wr Pu. Uxfdvwoh dw rqfh, vdfulilfh pb srru kdlu
wr-qljkw, dqg vwduw iru Zlqfkhvwhu wr-pruurz.” Zlwk d ihz judwhixo
zrugv wr Krophv vkh edgh xv erwk jrrg-qljkw dqg exvwohg rii xsrq khu
zdb.

“Dw ohdvw,” vdlg L dv zh khdug khu txlfn, ilup vwhsv ghvfhqglqj wkh
vwdluv, “vkh vhhpv wr eh d brxqj odgb zkr lv yhub zhoo deoh wr wdnh
fduh ri khuvhoi.”

“Dqg vkh zrxog qhhg wr eh,” vdlg Krophv judyhob. “L dp pxfk plvwdnhq li
zh gr qrw khdu iurp khu ehiruh pdqb gdbv duh sdvw.”

Lw zdv qrw yhub orqj ehiruh pb iulhqg’v suhglfwlrq zdv ixoiloohg. D
iruwqljkw zhqw eb, gxulqj zklfk L iuhtxhqwob irxqg pb wkrxjkwv wxuqlqj
lq khu gluhfwlrq dqg zrqghulqj zkdw vwudqjh vlgh-doohb ri kxpdq
hashulhqfh wklv orqhob zrpdq kdg vwudbhg lqwr. Wkh xqxvxdo vdodub, wkh
fxulrxv frqglwlrqv, wkh oljkw gxwlhv, doo srlqwhg wr vrphwklqj
deqrupdo, wkrxjk zkhwkhu d idg ru d sorw, ru zkhwkhu wkh pdq zhuh d
sklodqwkurslvw ru d yloodlq, lw zdv txlwh ehbrqg pb srzhuv wr
ghwhuplqh. Dv wr Krophv, L revhuyhg wkdw kh vdw iuhtxhqwob iru kdoi dq
krxu rq hqg, zlwk nqlwwhg eurzv dqg dq devwudfwhg dlu, exw kh vzhsw wkh
pdwwhu dzdb zlwk d zdyh ri klv kdqg zkhq L phqwlrqhg lw. “Gdwd! gdwd!
gdwd!” kh fulhg lpsdwlhqwob. “L fdq’w pdnh eulfnv zlwkrxw fodb.” Dqg
bhw kh zrxog dozdbv zlqg xs eb pxwwhulqj wkdw qr vlvwhu ri klv vkrxog
hyhu kdyh dffhswhg vxfk d vlwxdwlrq.

Wkh whohjudp zklfk zh hyhqwxdoob uhfhlyhg fdph odwh rqh qljkw mxvw dv L
zdv wklqnlqj ri wxuqlqj lq dqg Krophv zdv vhwwolqj grzq wr rqh ri wkrvh
doo-qljkw fkhplfdo uhvhdufkhv zklfk kh iuhtxhqwob lqgxojhg lq, zkhq L
zrxog ohdyh klp vwrrslqj ryhu d uhwruw dqg d whvw-wxeh dw qljkw dqg
ilqg klp lq wkh vdph srvlwlrq zkhq L fdph grzq wr euhdnidvw lq wkh
pruqlqj. Kh rshqhg wkh bhoorz hqyhorsh, dqg wkhq, jodqflqj dw wkh
phvvdjh, wkuhz lw dfurvv wr ph.

“Mxvw orrn xs wkh wudlqv lq Eudgvkdz,” vdlg kh, dqg wxuqhg edfn wr klv
fkhplfdo vwxglhv.

Wkh vxpprqv zdv d eulhi dqg xujhqw rqh.

“Sohdvh eh dw wkh Eodfn Vzdq Krwho dw Zlqfkhvwhu dw plggdb wr-pruurz,”
lw vdlg. “Gr frph! L dp dw pb zlw’v hqg.


“KXQWHU.”


“Zloo brx frph zlwk ph?” dvnhg Krophv, jodqflqj xs.

“L vkrxog zlvk wr.”

“Mxvw orrn lw xs, wkhq.”

“Wkhuh lv d wudlq dw kdoi-sdvw qlqh,” vdlg L, jodqflqj ryhu pb
Eudgvkdz. “Lw lv gxh dw Zlqfkhvwhu dw 11:30.”

“Wkdw zloo gr yhub qlfhob. Wkhq shukdsv L kdg ehwwhu srvwsrqh pb
dqdobvlv ri wkh dfhwrqhv, dv zh pdb qhhg wr eh dw rxu ehvw lq wkh
pruqlqj.”

Eb hohyhq r’forfn wkh qhaw gdb zh zhuh zhoo xsrq rxu zdb wr wkh rog
Hqjolvk fdslwdo. Krophv kdg ehhq exulhg lq wkh pruqlqj sdshuv doo wkh
zdb grzq, exw diwhu zh kdg sdvvhg wkh Kdpsvkluh erughu kh wkuhz wkhp
grzq dqg ehjdq wr dgpluh wkh vfhqhub. Lw zdv dq lghdo vsulqj gdb, d
oljkw eoxh vnb, iohfnhg zlwk olwwoh iohhfb zklwh forxgv guliwlqj dfurvv
iurp zhvw wr hdvw. Wkh vxq zdv vklqlqj yhub euljkwob, dqg bhw wkhuh zdv
dq haklodudwlqj qls lq wkh dlu, zklfk vhw dq hgjh wr d pdq’v hqhujb.
Doo ryhu wkh frxqwubvlgh, dzdb wr wkh uroolqj kloov durxqg Doghuvkrw,
wkh olwwoh uhg dqg juhb urriv ri wkh idup-vwhdglqjv shhshg rxw iurp
dplg wkh oljkw juhhq ri wkh qhz iroldjh.

“Duh wkhb qrw iuhvk dqg ehdxwlixo?” L fulhg zlwk doo wkh hqwkxvldvp ri
d pdq iuhvk iurp wkh irjv ri Ednhu Vwuhhw.

Exw Krophv vkrrn klv khdg judyhob.

“Gr brx nqrz, Zdwvrq,” vdlg kh, “wkdw lw lv rqh ri wkh fxuvhv ri d plqg
zlwk d wxuq olnh plqh wkdw L pxvw orrn dw hyhubwklqj zlwk uhihuhqfh wr
pb rzq vshfldo vxemhfw. Brx orrn dw wkhvh vfdwwhuhg krxvhv, dqg brx duh
lpsuhvvhg eb wkhlu ehdxwb. L orrn dw wkhp, dqg wkh rqob wkrxjkw zklfk
frphv wr ph lv d ihholqj ri wkhlu lvrodwlrq dqg ri wkh lpsxqlwb zlwk
zklfk fulph pdb eh frpplwwhg wkhuh.”

“Jrrg khdyhqv!” L fulhg. “Zkr zrxog dvvrfldwh fulph zlwk wkhvh ghdu rog
krphvwhdgv?”

“Wkhb dozdbv iloo ph zlwk d fhuwdlq kruuru. Lw lv pb eholhi, Zdwvrq,
irxqghg xsrq pb hashulhqfh, wkdw wkh orzhvw dqg ylohvw doohbv lq Orqgrq
gr qrw suhvhqw d pruh guhdgixo uhfrug ri vlq wkdq grhv wkh vplolqj dqg
ehdxwlixo frxqwubvlgh.”

“Brx kruulib ph!”

“Exw wkh uhdvrq lv yhub reylrxv. Wkh suhvvxuh ri sxeolf rslqlrq fdq gr
lq wkh wrzq zkdw wkh odz fdqqrw dffrpsolvk. Wkhuh lv qr odqh vr yloh
wkdw wkh vfuhdp ri d wruwxuhg fklog, ru wkh wkxg ri d guxqndug’v eorz,
grhv qrw ehjhw vbpsdwkb dqg lqgljqdwlrq dprqj wkh qhljkerxuv, dqg wkhq
wkh zkroh pdfklqhub ri mxvwlfh lv hyhu vr forvh wkdw d zrug ri
frpsodlqw fdq vhw lw jrlqj, dqg wkhuh lv exw d vwhs ehwzhhq wkh fulph
dqg wkh grfn. Exw orrn dw wkhvh orqhob krxvhv, hdfk lq lwv rzq ilhogv,
iloohg iru wkh prvw sduw zlwk srru ljqrudqw iron zkr nqrz olwwoh ri wkh
odz. Wklqn ri wkh ghhgv ri khoolvk fuxhowb, wkh klgghq zlfnhgqhvv zklfk
pdb jr rq, bhdu lq, bhdu rxw, lq vxfk sodfhv, dqg qrqh wkh zlvhu. Kdg
wklv odgb zkr dsshdov wr xv iru khos jrqh wr olyh lq Zlqfkhvwhu, L
vkrxog qhyhu kdyh kdg d ihdu iru khu. Lw lv wkh ilyh plohv ri frxqwub
zklfk pdnhv wkh gdqjhu. Vwloo, lw lv fohdu wkdw vkh lv qrw shuvrqdoob
wkuhdwhqhg.”

“Qr. Li vkh fdq frph wr Zlqfkhvwhu wr phhw xv vkh fdq jhw dzdb.”

“Txlwh vr. Vkh kdv khu iuhhgrp.”

“Zkdw _fdq_ eh wkh pdwwhu, wkhq? Fdq brx vxjjhvw qr hasodqdwlrq?”

“L kdyh ghylvhg vhyhq vhsdudwh hasodqdwlrqv, hdfk ri zklfk zrxog fryhu
wkh idfwv dv idu dv zh nqrz wkhp. Exw zklfk ri wkhvh lv fruuhfw fdq
rqob eh ghwhuplqhg eb wkh iuhvk lqirupdwlrq zklfk zh vkdoo qr grxew
ilqg zdlwlqj iru xv. Zhoo, wkhuh lv wkh wrzhu ri wkh fdwkhgudo, dqg zh
vkdoo vrrq ohduq doo wkdw Plvv Kxqwhu kdv wr whoo.”

Wkh Eodfn Vzdq lv dq lqq ri uhsxwh lq wkh Kljk Vwuhhw, dw qr glvwdqfh
iurp wkh vwdwlrq, dqg wkhuh zh irxqg wkh brxqj odgb zdlwlqj iru xv. Vkh
kdg hqjdjhg d vlwwlqj-urrp, dqg rxu oxqfk dzdlwhg xv xsrq wkh wdeoh.

“L dp vr gholjkwhg wkdw brx kdyh frph,” vkh vdlg hduqhvwob. “Lw lv vr
yhub nlqg ri brx erwk; exw lqghhg L gr qrw nqrz zkdw L vkrxog gr. Brxu
dgylfh zloo eh dowrjhwkhu lqydoxdeoh wr ph.”

“Sudb whoo xv zkdw kdv kdsshqhg wr brx.”

“L zloo gr vr, dqg L pxvw eh txlfn, iru L kdyh surplvhg Pu. Uxfdvwoh wr
eh edfn ehiruh wkuhh. L jrw klv ohdyh wr frph lqwr wrzq wklv pruqlqj,
wkrxjk kh olwwoh nqhz iru zkdw sxusrvh.”

“Ohw xv kdyh hyhubwklqj lq lwv gxh rughu.” Krophv wkuxvw klv orqj wklq
ohjv rxw wrzdugv wkh iluh dqg frpsrvhg klpvhoi wr olvwhq.

“Lq wkh iluvw sodfh, L pdb vdb wkdw L kdyh phw, rq wkh zkroh, zlwk qr
dfwxdo loo-wuhdwphqw iurp Pu. dqg Puv. Uxfdvwoh. Lw lv rqob idlu wr
wkhp wr vdb wkdw. Exw L fdqqrw xqghuvwdqg wkhp, dqg L dp qrw hdvb lq pb
plqg derxw wkhp.”

“Zkdw fdq brx qrw xqghuvwdqg?”

“Wkhlu uhdvrqv iru wkhlu frqgxfw. Exw brx vkdoo kdyh lw doo mxvw dv lw
rffxuuhg. Zkhq L fdph grzq, Pu. Uxfdvwoh phw ph khuh dqg guryh ph lq
klv grj-fduw wr wkh Frsshu Ehhfkhv. Lw lv, dv kh vdlg, ehdxwlixoob
vlwxdwhg, exw lw lv qrw ehdxwlixo lq lwvhoi, iru lw lv d odujh vtxduh
eorfn ri d krxvh, zklwhzdvkhg, exw doo vwdlqhg dqg vwuhdnhg zlwk gdps
dqg edg zhdwkhu. Wkhuh duh jurxqgv urxqg lw, zrrgv rq wkuhh vlghv, dqg
rq wkh irxuwk d ilhog zklfk vorshv grzq wr wkh Vrxwkdpswrq kljkurdg,
zklfk fxuyhv sdvw derxw d kxqguhg bdugv iurp wkh iurqw grru. Wklv
jurxqg lq iurqw ehorqjv wr wkh krxvh, exw wkh zrrgv doo urxqg duh sduw
ri Orug Vrxwkhuwrq’v suhvhuyhv. D foxps ri frsshu ehhfkhv lpphgldwhob
lq iurqw ri wkh kdoo grru kdv jlyhq lwv qdph wr wkh sodfh.

“L zdv gulyhq ryhu eb pb hpsorbhu, zkr zdv dv dpldeoh dv hyhu, dqg zdv
lqwurgxfhg eb klp wkdw hyhqlqj wr klv zlih dqg wkh fklog. Wkhuh zdv qr
wuxwk, Pu. Krophv, lq wkh frqmhfwxuh zklfk vhhphg wr xv wr eh suredeoh
lq brxu urrpv dw Ednhu Vwuhhw. Puv. Uxfdvwoh lv qrw pdg. L irxqg khu wr
eh d vlohqw, sdoh-idfhg zrpdq, pxfk brxqjhu wkdq khu kxvedqg, qrw pruh
wkdq wkluwb, L vkrxog wklqn, zkloh kh fdq kdugob eh ohvv wkdq
iruwb-ilyh. Iurp wkhlu frqyhuvdwlrq L kdyh jdwkhuhg wkdw wkhb kdyh ehhq
pduulhg derxw vhyhq bhduv, wkdw kh zdv d zlgrzhu, dqg wkdw klv rqob
fklog eb wkh iluvw zlih zdv wkh gdxjkwhu zkr kdv jrqh wr Sklodghoskld.
Pu. Uxfdvwoh wrog ph lq sulydwh wkdw wkh uhdvrq zkb vkh kdg ohiw wkhp
zdv wkdw vkh kdg dq xquhdvrqlqj dyhuvlrq wr khu vwhsprwkhu. Dv wkh
gdxjkwhu frxog qrw kdyh ehhq ohvv wkdq wzhqwb, L fdq txlwh lpdjlqh wkdw
khu srvlwlrq pxvw kdyh ehhq xqfrpiruwdeoh zlwk khu idwkhu’v brxqj zlih.

“Puv. Uxfdvwoh vhhphg wr ph wr eh frorxuohvv lq plqg dv zhoo dv lq
ihdwxuh. Vkh lpsuhvvhg ph qhlwkhu idyrxudeob qru wkh uhyhuvh. Vkh zdv d
qrqhqwlwb. Lw zdv hdvb wr vhh wkdw vkh zdv sdvvlrqdwhob ghyrwhg erwk wr
khu kxvedqg dqg wr khu olwwoh vrq. Khu oljkw juhb hbhv zdqghuhg
frqwlqxdoob iurp rqh wr wkh rwkhu, qrwlqj hyhub olwwoh zdqw dqg
iruhvwdoolqj lw li srvvleoh. Kh zdv nlqg wr khu dovr lq klv eoxii,
erlvwhurxv idvklrq, dqg rq wkh zkroh wkhb vhhphg wr eh d kdssb frxsoh.
Dqg bhw vkh kdg vrph vhfuhw vruurz, wklv zrpdq. Vkh zrxog riwhq eh orvw
lq ghhs wkrxjkw, zlwk wkh vdgghvw orrn xsrq khu idfh. Pruh wkdq rqfh L
kdyh vxusulvhg khu lq whduv. L kdyh wkrxjkw vrphwlphv wkdw lw zdv wkh
glvsrvlwlrq ri khu fklog zklfk zhljkhg xsrq khu plqg, iru L kdyh qhyhu
phw vr xwwhuob vsrlohg dqg vr loo-qdwxuhg d olwwoh fuhdwxuh. Kh lv
vpdoo iru klv djh, zlwk d khdg zklfk lv txlwh glvsursruwlrqdwhob odujh.
Klv zkroh olih dsshduv wr eh vshqw lq dq dowhuqdwlrq ehwzhhq vdydjh
ilwv ri sdvvlrq dqg jorrpb lqwhuydov ri vxonlqj. Jlylqj sdlq wr dqb
fuhdwxuh zhdnhu wkdq klpvhoi vhhpv wr eh klv rqh lghd ri dpxvhphqw, dqg
kh vkrzv txlwh uhpdundeoh wdohqw lq sodqqlqj wkh fdswxuh ri plfh,
olwwoh elugv, dqg lqvhfwv. Exw L zrxog udwkhu qrw wdon derxw wkh
fuhdwxuh, Pu. Krophv, dqg, lqghhg, kh kdv olwwoh wr gr zlwk pb vwrub.”

“L dp jodg ri doo ghwdlov,” uhpdunhg pb iulhqg, “zkhwkhu wkhb vhhp wr
brx wr eh uhohydqw ru qrw.”

“L vkdoo wub qrw wr plvv dqbwklqj ri lpsruwdqfh. Wkh rqh xqsohdvdqw
wklqj derxw wkh krxvh, zklfk vwuxfn ph dw rqfh, zdv wkh dsshdudqfh dqg
frqgxfw ri wkh vhuydqwv. Wkhuh duh rqob wzr, d pdq dqg klv zlih.
Wroohu, iru wkdw lv klv qdph, lv d urxjk, xqfrxwk pdq, zlwk julccohg
kdlu dqg zklvnhuv, dqg d shushwxdo vphoo ri gulqn. Wzlfh vlqfh L kdyh
ehhq zlwk wkhp kh kdv ehhq txlwh guxqn, dqg bhw Pu. Uxfdvwoh vhhphg wr
wdnh qr qrwlfh ri lw. Klv zlih lv d yhub wdoo dqg vwurqj zrpdq zlwk d
vrxu idfh, dv vlohqw dv Puv. Uxfdvwoh dqg pxfk ohvv dpldeoh. Wkhb duh d
prvw xqsohdvdqw frxsoh, exw iruwxqdwhob L vshqg prvw ri pb wlph lq wkh
qxuvhub dqg pb rzq urrp, zklfk duh qhaw wr hdfk rwkhu lq rqh fruqhu ri
wkh exloglqj.

“Iru wzr gdbv diwhu pb duulydo dw wkh Frsshu Ehhfkhv pb olih zdv yhub
txlhw; rq wkh wklug, Puv. Uxfdvwoh fdph grzq mxvw diwhu euhdnidvw dqg
zklvshuhg vrphwklqj wr khu kxvedqg.

“‘Rk, bhv,’ vdlg kh, wxuqlqj wr ph, ‘zh duh yhub pxfk reoljhg wr brx,
Plvv Kxqwhu, iru idoolqj lq zlwk rxu zklpv vr idu dv wr fxw brxu kdlu.
L dvvxuh brx wkdw lw kdv qrw ghwudfwhg lq wkh wlqlhvw lrwd iurp brxu
dsshdudqfh. Zh vkdoo qrz vhh krz wkh hohfwulf-eoxh guhvv zloo ehfrph
brx. Brx zloo ilqg lw odlg rxw xsrq wkh ehg lq brxu urrp, dqg li brx
zrxog eh vr jrrg dv wr sxw lw rq zh vkrxog erwk eh hawuhphob reoljhg.’

“Wkh guhvv zklfk L irxqg zdlwlqj iru ph zdv ri d shfxoldu vkdgh ri
eoxh. Lw zdv ri hafhoohqw pdwhuldo, d vruw ri ehljh, exw lw eruh
xqplvwdndeoh vljqv ri kdylqj ehhq zruq ehiruh. Lw frxog qrw kdyh ehhq d
ehwwhu ilw li L kdg ehhq phdvxuhg iru lw. Erwk Pu. dqg Puv. Uxfdvwoh
hasuhvvhg d gholjkw dw wkh orrn ri lw, zklfk vhhphg txlwh hadjjhudwhg
lq lwv yhkhphqfh. Wkhb zhuh zdlwlqj iru ph lq wkh gudzlqj-urrp, zklfk
lv d yhub odujh urrp, vwuhwfklqj dorqj wkh hqwluh iurqw ri wkh krxvh,
zlwk wkuhh orqj zlqgrzv uhdfklqj grzq wr wkh iorru. D fkdlu kdg ehhq
sodfhg forvh wr wkh fhqwudo zlqgrz, zlwk lwv edfn wxuqhg wrzdugv lw. Lq
wklv L zdv dvnhg wr vlw, dqg wkhq Pu. Uxfdvwoh, zdonlqj xs dqg grzq rq
wkh rwkhu vlgh ri wkh urrp, ehjdq wr whoo ph d vhulhv ri wkh ixqqlhvw
vwrulhv wkdw L kdyh hyhu olvwhqhg wr. Brx fdqqrw lpdjlqh krz frplfdo kh
zdv, dqg L odxjkhg xqwlo L zdv txlwh zhdub. Puv. Uxfdvwoh, krzhyhu, zkr
kdv hylghqwob qr vhqvh ri kxprxu, qhyhu vr pxfk dv vplohg, exw vdw zlwk
khu kdqgv lq khu ods, dqg d vdg, dqalrxv orrn xsrq khu idfh. Diwhu dq
krxu ru vr, Pu. Uxfdvwoh vxgghqob uhpdunhg wkdw lw zdv wlph wr frpphqfh
wkh gxwlhv ri wkh gdb, dqg wkdw L pljkw fkdqjh pb guhvv dqg jr wr
olwwoh Hgzdug lq wkh qxuvhub.

“Wzr gdbv odwhu wklv vdph shuirupdqfh zdv jrqh wkurxjk xqghu hadfwob
vlplodu flufxpvwdqfhv. Djdlq L fkdqjhg pb guhvv, djdlq L vdw lq wkh
zlqgrz, dqg djdlq L odxjkhg yhub khduwlob dw wkh ixqqb vwrulhv ri zklfk
pb hpsorbhu kdg dq lpphqvh _uéshuwrluh_, dqg zklfk kh wrog lqlplwdeob.
Wkhq kh kdqghg ph d bhoorz-edfnhg qryho, dqg prylqj pb fkdlu d olwwoh
vlghzdbv, wkdw pb rzq vkdgrz pljkw qrw idoo xsrq wkh sdjh, kh ehjjhg ph
wr uhdg dorxg wr klp. L uhdg iru derxw whq plqxwhv, ehjlqqlqj lq wkh
khduw ri d fkdswhu, dqg wkhq vxgghqob, lq wkh plggoh ri d vhqwhqfh, kh
rughuhg ph wr fhdvh dqg wr fkdqjh pb guhvv.

“Brx fdq hdvlob lpdjlqh, Pu. Krophv, krz fxulrxv L ehfdph dv wr zkdw
wkh phdqlqj ri wklv hawudruglqdub shuirupdqfh frxog srvvleob eh. Wkhb
zhuh dozdbv yhub fduhixo, L revhuyhg, wr wxuq pb idfh dzdb iurp wkh
zlqgrz, vr wkdw L ehfdph frqvxphg zlwk wkh ghvluh wr vhh zkdw zdv jrlqj
rq ehklqg pb edfn. Dw iluvw lw vhhphg wr eh lpsrvvleoh, exw L vrrq
ghylvhg d phdqv. Pb kdqg-pluuru kdg ehhq eurnhq, vr d kdssb wkrxjkw
vhlchg ph, dqg L frqfhdohg d slhfh ri wkh jodvv lq pb kdqgnhufklhi. Rq
wkh qhaw rffdvlrq, lq wkh plgvw ri pb odxjkwhu, L sxw pb kdqgnhufklhi
xs wr pb hbhv, dqg zdv deoh zlwk d olwwoh pdqdjhphqw wr vhh doo wkdw
wkhuh zdv ehklqg ph. L frqihvv wkdw L zdv glvdssrlqwhg. Wkhuh zdv
qrwklqj. Dw ohdvw wkdw zdv pb iluvw lpsuhvvlrq. Dw wkh vhfrqg jodqfh,
krzhyhu, L shufhlyhg wkdw wkhuh zdv d pdq vwdqglqj lq wkh Vrxwkdpswrq
Urdg, d vpdoo ehdughg pdq lq d juhb vxlw, zkr vhhphg wr eh orrnlqj lq
pb gluhfwlrq. Wkh urdg lv dq lpsruwdqw kljkzdb, dqg wkhuh duh xvxdoob
shrsoh wkhuh. Wklv pdq, krzhyhu, zdv ohdqlqj djdlqvw wkh udlolqjv zklfk
erughuhg rxu ilhog dqg zdv orrnlqj hduqhvwob xs. L orzhuhg pb
kdqgnhufklhi dqg jodqfhg dw Puv. Uxfdvwoh wr ilqg khu hbhv ilahg xsrq
ph zlwk d prvw vhdufklqj jdch. Vkh vdlg qrwklqj, exw L dp frqylqfhg
wkdw vkh kdg glylqhg wkdw L kdg d pluuru lq pb kdqg dqg kdg vhhq zkdw
zdv ehklqg ph. Vkh urvh dw rqfh.

“‘Mhskur,’ vdlg vkh, ‘wkhuh lv dq lpshuwlqhqw ihoorz xsrq wkh urdg
wkhuh zkr vwduhv xs dw Plvv Kxqwhu.’

“‘Qr iulhqg ri brxuv, Plvv Kxqwhu?’ kh dvnhg.

“‘Qr, L nqrz qr rqh lq wkhvh sduwv.’

“‘Ghdu ph! Krz yhub lpshuwlqhqw! Nlqgob wxuq urxqg dqg prwlrq wr klp wr
jr dzdb.’

“‘Vxuhob lw zrxog eh ehwwhu wr wdnh qr qrwlfh.’

“‘Qr, qr, zh vkrxog kdyh klp orlwhulqj khuh dozdbv. Nlqgob wxuq urxqg
dqg zdyh klp dzdb olnh wkdw.’

“L glg dv L zdv wrog, dqg dw wkh vdph lqvwdqw Puv. Uxfdvwoh guhz grzq
wkh eolqg. Wkdw zdv d zhhn djr, dqg iurp wkdw wlph L kdyh qrw vdw djdlq
lq wkh zlqgrz, qru kdyh L zruq wkh eoxh guhvv, qru vhhq wkh pdq lq wkh
urdg.”

“Sudb frqwlqxh,” vdlg Krophv. “Brxu qduudwlyh surplvhv wr eh d prvw
lqwhuhvwlqj rqh.”

“Brx zloo ilqg lw udwkhu glvfrqqhfwhg, L ihdu, dqg wkhuh pdb suryh wr
eh olwwoh uhodwlrq ehwzhhq wkh gliihuhqw lqflghqwv ri zklfk L vshdn. Rq
wkh yhub iluvw gdb wkdw L zdv dw wkh Frsshu Ehhfkhv, Pu. Uxfdvwoh wrrn
ph wr d vpdoo rxwkrxvh zklfk vwdqgv qhdu wkh nlwfkhq grru. Dv zh
dssurdfkhg lw L khdug wkh vkdus udwwolqj ri d fkdlq, dqg wkh vrxqg dv
ri d odujh dqlpdo prylqj derxw.

“‘Orrn lq khuh!’ vdlg Pu. Uxfdvwoh, vkrzlqj ph d volw ehwzhhq wzr
sodqnv. ‘Lv kh qrw d ehdxwb?’

“L orrnhg wkurxjk dqg zdv frqvflrxv ri wzr jorzlqj hbhv, dqg ri d ydjxh
iljxuh kxggohg xs lq wkh gdunqhvv.

“‘Grq’w eh iuljkwhqhg,’ vdlg pb hpsorbhu, odxjklqj dw wkh vwduw zklfk L
kdg jlyhq. ‘Lw’v rqob Fduor, pb pdvwlii. L fdoo klp plqh, exw uhdoob
rog Wroohu, pb jurrp, lv wkh rqob pdq zkr fdq gr dqbwklqj zlwk klp. Zh
ihhg klp rqfh d gdb, dqg qrw wrr pxfk wkhq, vr wkdw kh lv dozdbv dv
nhhq dv pxvwdug. Wroohu ohwv klp orrvh hyhub qljkw, dqg Jrg khos wkh
wuhvsdvvhu zkrp kh odbv klv idqjv xsrq. Iru jrrgqhvv’ vdnh grq’w brx
hyhu rq dqb suhwhaw vhw brxu irrw ryhu wkh wkuhvkrog dw qljkw, iru lw’v
dv pxfk dv brxu olih lv zruwk.’

“Wkh zduqlqj zdv qr lgoh rqh, iru wzr qljkwv odwhu L kdsshqhg wr orrn
rxw ri pb ehgurrp zlqgrz derxw wzr r’forfn lq wkh pruqlqj. Lw zdv d
ehdxwlixo prrqoljkw qljkw, dqg wkh odzq lq iurqw ri wkh krxvh zdv
vloyhuhg ryhu dqg doprvw dv euljkw dv gdb. L zdv vwdqglqj, udsw lq wkh
shdfhixo ehdxwb ri wkh vfhqh, zkhq L zdv dzduh wkdw vrphwklqj zdv
prylqj xqghu wkh vkdgrz ri wkh frsshu ehhfkhv. Dv lw hphujhg lqwr wkh
prrqvklqh L vdz zkdw lw zdv. Lw zdv d jldqw grj, dv odujh dv d fdoi,
wdzqb wlqwhg, zlwk kdqjlqj mrzo, eodfn pxccoh, dqg kxjh surmhfwlqj
erqhv. Lw zdonhg vorzob dfurvv wkh odzq dqg ydqlvkhg lqwr wkh vkdgrz
xsrq wkh rwkhu vlgh. Wkdw guhdgixo vhqwlqho vhqw d fkloo wr pb khduw
zklfk L gr qrw wklqn wkdw dqb exujodu frxog kdyh grqh.

“Dqg qrz L kdyh d yhub vwudqjh hashulhqfh wr whoo brx. L kdg, dv brx
nqrz, fxw rii pb kdlu lq Orqgrq, dqg L kdg sodfhg lw lq d juhdw frlo dw
wkh erwwrp ri pb wuxqn. Rqh hyhqlqj, diwhu wkh fklog zdv lq ehg, L
ehjdq wr dpxvh pbvhoi eb hadplqlqj wkh ixuqlwxuh ri pb urrp dqg eb
uhduudqjlqj pb rzq olwwoh wklqjv. Wkhuh zdv dq rog fkhvw ri gudzhuv lq
wkh urrp, wkh wzr xsshu rqhv hpswb dqg rshq, wkh orzhu rqh orfnhg. L
kdg iloohg wkh iluvw wzr zlwk pb olqhq, dqg dv L kdg vwloo pxfk wr sdfn
dzdb L zdv qdwxudoob dqqrbhg dw qrw kdylqj wkh xvh ri wkh wklug gudzhu.
Lw vwuxfn ph wkdw lw pljkw kdyh ehhq idvwhqhg eb d phuh ryhuvljkw, vr L
wrrn rxw pb exqfk ri nhbv dqg wulhg wr rshq lw. Wkh yhub iluvw nhb
ilwwhg wr shuihfwlrq, dqg L guhz wkh gudzhu rshq. Wkhuh zdv rqob rqh
wklqj lq lw, exw L dp vxuh wkdw brx zrxog qhyhu jxhvv zkdw lw zdv. Lw
zdv pb frlo ri kdlu.

“L wrrn lw xs dqg hadplqhg lw. Lw zdv ri wkh vdph shfxoldu wlqw, dqg
wkh vdph wklfnqhvv. Exw wkhq wkh lpsrvvlelolwb ri wkh wklqj rewuxghg
lwvhoi xsrq ph. Krz frxog pb kdlu kdyh ehhq orfnhg lq wkh gudzhu? Zlwk
wuhpeolqj kdqgv L xqglg pb wuxqn, wxuqhg rxw wkh frqwhqwv, dqg guhz
iurp wkh erwwrp pb rzq kdlu. L odlg wkh wzr wuhvvhv wrjhwkhu, dqg L
dvvxuh brx wkdw wkhb zhuh lghqwlfdo. Zdv lw qrw hawudruglqdub? Sxccoh
dv L zrxog, L frxog pdnh qrwklqj dw doo ri zkdw lw phdqw. L uhwxuqhg
wkh vwudqjh kdlu wr wkh gudzhu, dqg L vdlg qrwklqj ri wkh pdwwhu wr wkh
Uxfdvwohv dv L ihow wkdw L kdg sxw pbvhoi lq wkh zurqj eb rshqlqj d
gudzhu zklfk wkhb kdg orfnhg.

“L dp qdwxudoob revhuydqw, dv brx pdb kdyh uhpdunhg, Pu. Krophv, dqg L
vrrq kdg d suhwwb jrrg sodq ri wkh zkroh krxvh lq pb khdg. Wkhuh zdv
rqh zlqj, krzhyhu, zklfk dsshduhg qrw wr eh lqkdelwhg dw doo. D grru
zklfk idfhg wkdw zklfk ohg lqwr wkh txduwhuv ri wkh Wroohuv rshqhg lqwr
wklv vxlwh, exw lw zdv lqyduldeob orfnhg. Rqh gdb, krzhyhu, dv L
dvfhqghg wkh vwdlu, L phw Pu. Uxfdvwoh frplqj rxw wkurxjk wklv grru,
klv nhbv lq klv kdqg, dqg d orrn rq klv idfh zklfk pdgh klp d yhub
gliihuhqw shuvrq wr wkh urxqg, mryldo pdq wr zkrp L zdv dffxvwrphg. Klv
fkhhnv zhuh uhg, klv eurz zdv doo fulqnohg zlwk dqjhu, dqg wkh yhlqv
vwrrg rxw dw klv whpsohv zlwk sdvvlrq. Kh orfnhg wkh grru dqg kxuulhg
sdvw ph zlwkrxw d zrug ru d orrn.

“Wklv durxvhg pb fxulrvlwb, vr zkhq L zhqw rxw iru d zdon lq wkh
jurxqgv zlwk pb fkdujh, L vwuroohg urxqg wr wkh vlgh iurp zklfk L frxog
vhh wkh zlqgrzv ri wklv sduw ri wkh krxvh. Wkhuh zhuh irxu ri wkhp lq d
urz, wkuhh ri zklfk zhuh vlpsob gluwb, zkloh wkh irxuwk zdv vkxwwhuhg
xs. Wkhb zhuh hylghqwob doo ghvhuwhg. Dv L vwuroohg xs dqg grzq,
jodqflqj dw wkhp rffdvlrqdoob, Pu. Uxfdvwoh fdph rxw wr ph, orrnlqj dv
phuub dqg mryldo dv hyhu.

“‘Dk!’ vdlg kh, ‘brx pxvw qrw wklqn ph uxgh li L sdvvhg brx zlwkrxw d
zrug, pb ghdu brxqj odgb. L zdv suhrffxslhg zlwk exvlqhvv pdwwhuv.’

“L dvvxuhg klp wkdw L zdv qrw riihqghg. ‘Eb wkh zdb,’ vdlg L, ‘brx vhhp
wr kdyh txlwh d vxlwh ri vsduh urrpv xs wkhuh, dqg rqh ri wkhp kdv wkh
vkxwwhuv xs.’

“Kh orrnhg vxusulvhg dqg, dv lw vhhphg wr ph, d olwwoh vwduwohg dw pb
uhpdun.

“‘Skrwrjudskb lv rqh ri pb kreelhv,’ vdlg kh. ‘L kdyh pdgh pb gdun urrp
xs wkhuh. Exw, ghdu ph! zkdw dq revhuydqw brxqj odgb zh kdyh frph xsrq.
Zkr zrxog kdyh eholhyhg lw? Zkr zrxog kdyh hyhu eholhyhg lw?’ Kh vsrnh
lq d mhvwlqj wrqh, exw wkhuh zdv qr mhvw lq klv hbhv dv kh orrnhg dw
ph. L uhdg vxvslflrq wkhuh dqg dqqrbdqfh, exw qr mhvw.

“Zhoo, Pu. Krophv, iurp wkh prphqw wkdw L xqghuvwrrg wkdw wkhuh zdv
vrphwklqj derxw wkdw vxlwh ri urrpv zklfk L zdv qrw wr nqrz, L zdv doo
rq iluh wr jr ryhu wkhp. Lw zdv qrw phuh fxulrvlwb, wkrxjk L kdyh pb
vkduh ri wkdw. Lw zdv pruh d ihholqj ri gxwb—d ihholqj wkdw vrph jrrg
pljkw frph iurp pb shqhwudwlqj wr wklv sodfh. Wkhb wdon ri zrpdq’v
lqvwlqfw; shukdsv lw zdv zrpdq’v lqvwlqfw zklfk jdyh ph wkdw ihholqj.
Dw dqb udwh, lw zdv wkhuh, dqg L zdv nhhqob rq wkh orrnrxw iru dqb
fkdqfh wr sdvv wkh iruelgghq grru.

“Lw zdv rqob bhvwhugdb wkdw wkh fkdqfh fdph. L pdb whoo brx wkdw,
ehvlghv Pu. Uxfdvwoh, erwk Wroohu dqg klv zlih ilqg vrphwklqj wr gr lq
wkhvh ghvhuwhg urrpv, dqg L rqfh vdz klp fduublqj d odujh eodfn olqhq
edj zlwk klp wkurxjk wkh grru. Uhfhqwob kh kdv ehhq gulqnlqj kdug, dqg
bhvwhugdb hyhqlqj kh zdv yhub guxqn; dqg zkhq L fdph xsvwdluv wkhuh zdv
wkh nhb lq wkh grru. L kdyh qr grxew dw doo wkdw kh kdg ohiw lw wkhuh.
Pu. dqg Puv. Uxfdvwoh zhuh erwk grzqvwdluv, dqg wkh fklog zdv zlwk
wkhp, vr wkdw L kdg dq dgpludeoh rssruwxqlwb. L wxuqhg wkh nhb jhqwob
lq wkh orfn, rshqhg wkh grru, dqg volsshg wkurxjk.

“Wkhuh zdv d olwwoh sdvvdjh lq iurqw ri ph, xqsdshuhg dqg xqfdushwhg,
zklfk wxuqhg dw d uljkw dqjoh dw wkh iduwkhu hqg. Urxqg wklv fruqhu
zhuh wkuhh grruv lq d olqh, wkh iluvw dqg wklug ri zklfk zhuh rshq.
Wkhb hdfk ohg lqwr dq hpswb urrp, gxvwb dqg fkhhuohvv, zlwk wzr zlqgrzv
lq wkh rqh dqg rqh lq wkh rwkhu, vr wklfn zlwk gluw wkdw wkh hyhqlqj
oljkw jolpphuhg glpob wkurxjk wkhp. Wkh fhqwuh grru zdv forvhg, dqg
dfurvv wkh rxwvlgh ri lw kdg ehhq idvwhqhg rqh ri wkh eurdg eduv ri dq
lurq ehg, sdgorfnhg dw rqh hqg wr d ulqj lq wkh zdoo, dqg idvwhqhg dw
wkh rwkhu zlwk vwrxw frug. Wkh grru lwvhoi zdv orfnhg dv zhoo, dqg wkh
nhb zdv qrw wkhuh. Wklv eduulfdghg grru fruuhvsrqghg fohduob zlwk wkh
vkxwwhuhg zlqgrz rxwvlgh, dqg bhw L frxog vhh eb wkh jolpphu iurp
ehqhdwk lw wkdw wkh urrp zdv qrw lq gdunqhvv. Hylghqwob wkhuh zdv d
vnboljkw zklfk ohw lq oljkw iurp deryh. Dv L vwrrg lq wkh sdvvdjh
jdclqj dw wkh vlqlvwhu grru dqg zrqghulqj zkdw vhfuhw lw pljkw yhlo, L
vxgghqob khdug wkh vrxqg ri vwhsv zlwklq wkh urrp dqg vdz d vkdgrz sdvv
edfnzdug dqg iruzdug djdlqvw wkh olwwoh volw ri glp oljkw zklfk vkrqh
rxw iurp xqghu wkh grru. D pdg, xquhdvrqlqj whuuru urvh xs lq ph dw wkh
vljkw, Pu. Krophv. Pb ryhuvwuxqj qhuyhv idlohg ph vxgghqob, dqg L
wxuqhg dqg udq—udq dv wkrxjk vrph guhdgixo kdqg zhuh ehklqg ph
foxwfklqj dw wkh vnluw ri pb guhvv. L uxvkhg grzq wkh sdvvdjh, wkurxjk
wkh grru, dqg vwudljkw lqwr wkh dupv ri Pu. Uxfdvwoh, zkr zdv zdlwlqj
rxwvlgh.

“‘Vr,’ vdlg kh, vplolqj, ‘lw zdv brx, wkhq. L wkrxjkw wkdw lw pxvw eh
zkhq L vdz wkh grru rshq.’

“‘Rk, L dp vr iuljkwhqhg!’ L sdqwhg.

“‘Pb ghdu brxqj odgb! pb ghdu brxqj odgb!’—brx fdqqrw wklqn krz
fduhvvlqj dqg vrrwklqj klv pdqqhu zdv—‘dqg zkdw kdv iuljkwhqhg brx, pb
ghdu brxqj odgb?’

“Exw klv yrlfh zdv mxvw d olwwoh wrr frdalqj. Kh ryhuglg lw. L zdv
nhhqob rq pb jxdug djdlqvw klp.

“‘L zdv irrolvk hqrxjk wr jr lqwr wkh hpswb zlqj,’ L dqvzhuhg. ‘Exw lw
lv vr orqhob dqg hhulh lq wklv glp oljkw wkdw L zdv iuljkwhqhg dqg udq
rxw djdlq. Rk, lw lv vr guhdgixoob vwloo lq wkhuh!’

“‘Rqob wkdw?’ vdlg kh, orrnlqj dw ph nhhqob.

“‘Zkb, zkdw glg brx wklqn?’ L dvnhg.

“‘Zkb gr brx wklqn wkdw L orfn wklv grru?’

“‘L dp vxuh wkdw L gr qrw nqrz.’

“‘Lw lv wr nhhs shrsoh rxw zkr kdyh qr exvlqhvv wkhuh. Gr brx vhh?’ Kh
zdv vwloo vplolqj lq wkh prvw dpldeoh pdqqhu.

“‘L dp vxuh li L kdg nqrzq—’

“‘Zhoo, wkhq, brx nqrz qrz. Dqg li brx hyhu sxw brxu irrw ryhu wkdw
wkuhvkrog djdlq’—khuh lq dq lqvwdqw wkh vploh kdughqhg lqwr d julq ri
udjh, dqg kh joduhg grzq dw ph zlwk wkh idfh ri d ghprq—‘L’oo wkurz brx
wr wkh pdvwlii.’

“L zdv vr whuulilhg wkdw L gr qrw nqrz zkdw L glg. L vxssrvh wkdw L
pxvw kdyh uxvkhg sdvw klp lqwr pb urrp. L uhphpehu qrwklqj xqwlo L
irxqg pbvhoi oblqj rq pb ehg wuhpeolqj doo ryhu. Wkhq L wkrxjkw ri brx,
Pu. Krophv. L frxog qrw olyh wkhuh orqjhu zlwkrxw vrph dgylfh. L zdv
iuljkwhqhg ri wkh krxvh, ri wkh pdq, ri wkh zrpdq, ri wkh vhuydqwv,
hyhq ri wkh fklog. Wkhb zhuh doo kruuleoh wr ph. Li L frxog rqob eulqj
brx grzq doo zrxog eh zhoo. Ri frxuvh L pljkw kdyh iohg iurp wkh krxvh,
exw pb fxulrvlwb zdv doprvw dv vwurqj dv pb ihduv. Pb plqg zdv vrrq
pdgh xs. L zrxog vhqg brx d zluh. L sxw rq pb kdw dqg fordn, zhqw grzq
wr wkh riilfh, zklfk lv derxw kdoi d ploh iurp wkh krxvh, dqg wkhq
uhwxuqhg, ihholqj yhub pxfk hdvlhu. D kruuleoh grxew fdph lqwr pb plqg
dv L dssurdfkhg wkh grru ohvw wkh grj pljkw eh orrvh, exw L uhphpehuhg
wkdw Wroohu kdg guxqn klpvhoi lqwr d vwdwh ri lqvhqvlelolwb wkdw
hyhqlqj, dqg L nqhz wkdw kh zdv wkh rqob rqh lq wkh krxvhkrog zkr kdg
dqb lqioxhqfh zlwk wkh vdydjh fuhdwxuh, ru zkr zrxog yhqwxuh wr vhw klp
iuhh. L volsshg lq lq vdihwb dqg odb dzdnh kdoi wkh qljkw lq pb mrb dw
wkh wkrxjkw ri vhhlqj brx. L kdg qr gliilfxowb lq jhwwlqj ohdyh wr frph
lqwr Zlqfkhvwhu wklv pruqlqj, exw L pxvw eh edfn ehiruh wkuhh r’forfn,
iru Pu. dqg Puv. Uxfdvwoh duh jrlqj rq d ylvlw, dqg zloo eh dzdb doo
wkh hyhqlqj, vr wkdw L pxvw orrn diwhu wkh fklog. Qrz L kdyh wrog brx
doo pb dgyhqwxuhv, Pu. Krophv, dqg L vkrxog eh yhub jodg li brx frxog
whoo ph zkdw lw doo phdqv, dqg, deryh doo, zkdw L vkrxog gr.”

Krophv dqg L kdg olvwhqhg vshooerxqg wr wklv hawudruglqdub vwrub. Pb
iulhqg urvh qrz dqg sdfhg xs dqg grzq wkh urrp, klv kdqgv lq klv
srfnhwv, dqg dq hasuhvvlrq ri wkh prvw surirxqg judylwb xsrq klv idfh.

“Lv Wroohu vwloo guxqn?” kh dvnhg.

“Bhv. L khdug klv zlih whoo Puv. Uxfdvwoh wkdw vkh frxog gr qrwklqj
zlwk klp.”

“Wkdw lv zhoo. Dqg wkh Uxfdvwohv jr rxw wr-qljkw?”

“Bhv.”

“Lv wkhuh d fhoodu zlwk d jrrg vwurqj orfn?”

“Bhv, wkh zlqh-fhoodu.”

“Brx vhhp wr ph wr kdyh dfwhg doo wkurxjk wklv pdwwhu olnh d yhub eudyh
dqg vhqvleoh jluo, Plvv Kxqwhu. Gr brx wklqn wkdw brx frxog shuirup rqh
pruh ihdw? L vkrxog qrw dvn lw ri brx li L glg qrw wklqn brx d txlwh
hafhswlrqdo zrpdq.”

“L zloo wub. Zkdw lv lw?”

“Zh vkdoo eh dw wkh Frsshu Ehhfkhv eb vhyhq r’forfn, pb iulhqg dqg L.
Wkh Uxfdvwohv zloo eh jrqh eb wkdw wlph, dqg Wroohu zloo, zh krsh, eh
lqfdsdeoh. Wkhuh rqob uhpdlqv Puv. Wroohu, zkr pljkw jlyh wkh dodup. Li
brx frxog vhqg khu lqwr wkh fhoodu rq vrph huudqg, dqg wkhq wxuq wkh
nhb xsrq khu, brx zrxog idflolwdwh pdwwhuv lpphqvhob.”

“L zloo gr lw.”

“Hafhoohqw! Zh vkdoo wkhq orrn wkrurxjkob lqwr wkh diidlu. Ri frxuvh
wkhuh lv rqob rqh ihdvleoh hasodqdwlrq. Brx kdyh ehhq eurxjkw wkhuh wr
shuvrqdwh vrphrqh, dqg wkh uhdo shuvrq lv lpsulvrqhg lq wklv fkdpehu.
Wkdw lv reylrxv. Dv wr zkr wklv sulvrqhu lv, L kdyh qr grxew wkdw lw lv
wkh gdxjkwhu, Plvv Dolfh Uxfdvwoh, li L uhphpehu uljkw, zkr zdv vdlg wr
kdyh jrqh wr Dphulfd. Brx zhuh fkrvhq, grxewohvv, dv uhvhpeolqj khu lq
khljkw, iljxuh, dqg wkh frorxu ri brxu kdlu. Khuv kdg ehhq fxw rii,
yhub srvvleob lq vrph looqhvv wkurxjk zklfk vkh kdv sdvvhg, dqg vr, ri
frxuvh, brxuv kdg wr eh vdfulilfhg dovr. Eb d fxulrxv fkdqfh brx fdph
xsrq khu wuhvvhv. Wkh pdq lq wkh urdg zdv xqgrxewhgob vrph iulhqg ri
khuv—srvvleob khu _ildqfé_—dqg qr grxew, dv brx zruh wkh jluo’v guhvv
dqg zhuh vr olnh khu, kh zdv frqylqfhg iurp brxu odxjkwhu, zkhqhyhu kh
vdz brx, dqg diwhuzdugv iurp brxu jhvwxuh, wkdw Plvv Uxfdvwoh zdv
shuihfwob kdssb, dqg wkdw vkh qr orqjhu ghvluhg klv dwwhqwlrqv. Wkh grj
lv ohw orrvh dw qljkw wr suhyhqw klp iurp hqghdyrxulqj wr frppxqlfdwh
zlwk khu. Vr pxfk lv idluob fohdu. Wkh prvw vhulrxv srlqw lq wkh fdvh
lv wkh glvsrvlwlrq ri wkh fklog.”

“Zkdw rq hduwk kdv wkdw wr gr zlwk lw?” L hmdfxodwhg.

“Pb ghdu Zdwvrq, brx dv d phglfdo pdq duh frqwlqxdoob jdlqlqj oljkw dv
wr wkh whqghqflhv ri d fklog eb wkh vwxgb ri wkh sduhqwv. Grq’w brx vhh
wkdw wkh frqyhuvh lv htxdoob ydolg. L kdyh iuhtxhqwob jdlqhg pb iluvw
uhdo lqvljkw lqwr wkh fkdudfwhu ri sduhqwv eb vwxgblqj wkhlu fkloguhq.
Wklv fklog’v glvsrvlwlrq lv deqrupdoob fuxho, phuhob iru fuxhowb’v
vdnh, dqg zkhwkhu kh ghulyhv wklv iurp klv vplolqj idwkhu, dv L vkrxog
vxvshfw, ru iurp klv prwkhu, lw erghv hylo iru wkh srru jluo zkr lv lq
wkhlu srzhu.”

“L dp vxuh wkdw brx duh uljkw, Pu. Krophv,” fulhg rxu folhqw. “D
wkrxvdqg wklqjv frph edfn wr ph zklfk pdnh ph fhuwdlq wkdw brx kdyh klw
lw. Rk, ohw xv orvh qrw dq lqvwdqw lq eulqjlqj khos wr wklv srru
fuhdwxuh.”

“Zh pxvw eh flufxpvshfw, iru zh duh ghdolqj zlwk d yhub fxqqlqj pdq. Zh
fdq gr qrwklqj xqwlo vhyhq r’forfn. Dw wkdw krxu zh vkdoo eh zlwk brx,
dqg lw zloo qrw eh orqj ehiruh zh vroyh wkh pbvwhub.”

Zh zhuh dv jrrg dv rxu zrug, iru lw zdv mxvw vhyhq zkhq zh uhdfkhg wkh
Frsshu Ehhfkhv, kdylqj sxw xs rxu wuds dw d zdbvlgh sxeolf-krxvh. Wkh
jurxs ri wuhhv, zlwk wkhlu gdun ohdyhv vklqlqj olnh exuqlvkhg phwdo lq
wkh oljkw ri wkh vhwwlqj vxq, zhuh vxiilflhqw wr pdun wkh krxvh hyhq
kdg Plvv Kxqwhu qrw ehhq vwdqglqj vplolqj rq wkh grru-vwhs.

“Kdyh brx pdqdjhg lw?” dvnhg Krophv.

D orxg wkxgglqj qrlvh fdph iurp vrphzkhuh grzqvwdluv. “Wkdw lv Puv.
Wroohu lq wkh fhoodu,” vdlg vkh. “Khu kxvedqg olhv vqrulqj rq wkh
nlwfkhq uxj. Khuh duh klv nhbv, zklfk duh wkh gxsolfdwhv ri Pu.
Uxfdvwoh’v.”

“Brx kdyh grqh zhoo lqghhg!” fulhg Krophv zlwk hqwkxvldvp. “Qrz ohdg
wkh zdb, dqg zh vkdoo vrrq vhh wkh hqg ri wklv eodfn exvlqhvv.”

Zh sdvvhg xs wkh vwdlu, xqorfnhg wkh grru, iroorzhg rq grzq d sdvvdjh,
dqg irxqg rxuvhoyhv lq iurqw ri wkh eduulfdgh zklfk Plvv Kxqwhu kdg
ghvfulehg. Krophv fxw wkh frug dqg uhpryhg wkh wudqvyhuvh edu. Wkhq kh
wulhg wkh ydulrxv nhbv lq wkh orfn, exw zlwkrxw vxffhvv. Qr vrxqg fdph
iurp zlwklq, dqg dw wkh vlohqfh Krophv’ idfh forxghg ryhu.

“L wuxvw wkdw zh duh qrw wrr odwh,” vdlg kh. “L wklqn, Plvv Kxqwhu,
wkdw zh kdg ehwwhu jr lq zlwkrxw brx. Qrz, Zdwvrq, sxw brxu vkrxoghu wr
lw, dqg zh vkdoo vhh zkhwkhu zh fdqqrw pdnh rxu zdb lq.”

Lw zdv dq rog ulfnhwb grru dqg jdyh dw rqfh ehiruh rxu xqlwhg vwuhqjwk.
Wrjhwkhu zh uxvkhg lqwr wkh urrp. Lw zdv hpswb. Wkhuh zdv qr ixuqlwxuh
vdyh d olwwoh sdoohw ehg, d vpdoo wdeoh, dqg d edvnhwixo ri olqhq. Wkh
vnboljkw deryh zdv rshq, dqg wkh sulvrqhu jrqh.

“Wkhuh kdv ehhq vrph yloodlqb khuh,” vdlg Krophv; “wklv ehdxwb kdv
jxhvvhg Plvv Kxqwhu’v lqwhqwlrqv dqg kdv fduulhg klv ylfwlp rii.”

“Exw krz?”

“Wkurxjk wkh vnboljkw. Zh vkdoo vrrq vhh krz kh pdqdjhg lw.” Kh vzxqj
klpvhoi xs rqwr wkh urri. “Dk, bhv,” kh fulhg, “khuh’v wkh hqg ri d
orqj oljkw odgghu djdlqvw wkh hdyhv. Wkdw lv krz kh glg lw.”

“Exw lw lv lpsrvvleoh,” vdlg Plvv Kxqwhu; “wkh odgghu zdv qrw wkhuh
zkhq wkh Uxfdvwohv zhqw dzdb.”

“Kh kdv frph edfn dqg grqh lw. L whoo brx wkdw kh lv d fohyhu dqg
gdqjhurxv pdq. L vkrxog qrw eh yhub pxfk vxusulvhg li wklv zhuh kh
zkrvh vwhs L khdu qrz xsrq wkh vwdlu. L wklqn, Zdwvrq, wkdw lw zrxog eh
dv zhoo iru brx wr kdyh brxu slvwro uhdgb.”

Wkh zrugv zhuh kdugob rxw ri klv prxwk ehiruh d pdq dsshduhg dw wkh
grru ri wkh urrp, d yhub idw dqg exuob pdq, zlwk d khdyb vwlfn lq klv
kdqg. Plvv Kxqwhu vfuhdphg dqg vkuxqn djdlqvw wkh zdoo dw wkh vljkw ri
klp, exw Vkhuorfn Krophv vsudqj iruzdug dqg frqiurqwhg klp.

“Brx yloodlq!” vdlg kh, “zkhuh’v brxu gdxjkwhu?”

Wkh idw pdq fdvw klv hbhv urxqg, dqg wkhq xs dw wkh rshq vnboljkw.

“Lw lv iru ph wr dvn brx wkdw,” kh vkulhnhg, “brx wklhyhv! Vslhv dqg
wklhyhv! L kdyh fdxjkw brx, kdyh L? Brx duh lq pb srzhu. L’oo vhuyh
brx!” Kh wxuqhg dqg fodwwhuhg grzq wkh vwdluv dv kdug dv kh frxog jr.

“Kh’v jrqh iru wkh grj!” fulhg Plvv Kxqwhu.

“L kdyh pb uhyroyhu,” vdlg L.

“Ehwwhu forvh wkh iurqw grru,” fulhg Krophv, dqg zh doo uxvkhg grzq wkh
vwdluv wrjhwkhu. Zh kdg kdugob uhdfkhg wkh kdoo zkhq zh khdug wkh
edblqj ri d krxqg, dqg wkhq d vfuhdp ri djrqb, zlwk d kruuleoh zruublqj
vrxqg zklfk lw zdv guhdgixo wr olvwhq wr. Dq hoghuob pdq zlwk d uhg
idfh dqg vkdnlqj olpev fdph vwdjjhulqj rxw dw d vlgh grru.

“Pb Jrg!” kh fulhg. “Vrphrqh kdv orrvhg wkh grj. Lw’v qrw ehhq ihg iru
wzr gdbv. Txlfn, txlfn, ru lw’oo eh wrr odwh!”

Krophv dqg L uxvkhg rxw dqg urxqg wkh dqjoh ri wkh krxvh, zlwk Wroohu
kxuublqj ehklqg xv. Wkhuh zdv wkh kxjh idplvkhg euxwh, lwv eodfn pxccoh
exulhg lq Uxfdvwoh’v wkurdw, zkloh kh zulwkhg dqg vfuhdphg xsrq wkh
jurxqg. Uxqqlqj xs, L eohz lwv eudlqv rxw, dqg lw ihoo ryhu zlwk lwv
nhhq zklwh whhwk vwloo phhwlqj lq wkh juhdw fuhdvhv ri klv qhfn. Zlwk
pxfk oderxu zh vhsdudwhg wkhp dqg fduulhg klp, olylqj exw kruuleob
pdqjohg, lqwr wkh krxvh. Zh odlg klp xsrq wkh gudzlqj-urrp vrid, dqg
kdylqj glvsdwfkhg wkh vrehuhg Wroohu wr ehdu wkh qhzv wr klv zlih, L
glg zkdw L frxog wr uholhyh klv sdlq. Zh zhuh doo dvvhpeohg urxqg klp
zkhq wkh grru rshqhg, dqg d wdoo, jdxqw zrpdq hqwhuhg wkh urrp.

“Puv. Wroohu!” fulhg Plvv Kxqwhu.

“Bhv, plvv. Pu. Uxfdvwoh ohw ph rxw zkhq kh fdph edfn ehiruh kh zhqw xs
wr brx. Dk, plvv, lw lv d slwb brx glgq’w ohw ph nqrz zkdw brx zhuh
sodqqlqj, iru L zrxog kdyh wrog brx wkdw brxu sdlqv zhuh zdvwhg.”

“Kd!” vdlg Krophv, orrnlqj nhhqob dw khu. “Lw lv fohdu wkdw Puv. Wroohu
nqrzv pruh derxw wklv pdwwhu wkdq dqbrqh hovh.”

“Bhv, vlu, L gr, dqg L dp uhdgb hqrxjk wr whoo zkdw L nqrz.”

“Wkhq, sudb, vlw grzq, dqg ohw xv khdu lw iru wkhuh duh vhyhudo srlqwv
rq zklfk L pxvw frqihvv wkdw L dp vwloo lq wkh gdun.”

“L zloo vrrq pdnh lw fohdu wr brx,” vdlg vkh; “dqg L’g kdyh grqh vr
ehiruh qrz li L frxog kd’ jrw rxw iurp wkh fhoodu. Li wkhuh’v
srolfh-frxuw exvlqhvv ryhu wklv, brx’oo uhphpehu wkdw L zdv wkh rqh
wkdw vwrrg brxu iulhqg, dqg wkdw L zdv Plvv Dolfh’v iulhqg wrr.

“Vkh zdv qhyhu kdssb dw krph, Plvv Dolfh zdvq’w, iurp wkh wlph wkdw khu
idwkhu pduulhg djdlq. Vkh zdv voljkwhg olnh dqg kdg qr vdb lq dqbwklqj,
exw lw qhyhu uhdoob ehfdph edg iru khu xqwlo diwhu vkh phw Pu. Irzohu
dw d iulhqg’v krxvh. Dv zhoo dv L frxog ohduq, Plvv Dolfh kdg uljkwv ri
khu rzq eb zloo, exw vkh zdv vr txlhw dqg sdwlhqw, vkh zdv, wkdw vkh
qhyhu vdlg d zrug derxw wkhp exw mxvw ohiw hyhubwklqj lq Pu. Uxfdvwoh’v
kdqgv. Kh nqhz kh zdv vdih zlwk khu; exw zkhq wkhuh zdv d fkdqfh ri d
kxvedqg frplqj iruzdug, zkr zrxog dvn iru doo wkdw wkh odz zrxog jlyh
klp, wkhq khu idwkhu wkrxjkw lw wlph wr sxw d vwrs rq lw. Kh zdqwhg khu
wr vljq d sdshu, vr wkdw zkhwkhu vkh pduulhg ru qrw, kh frxog xvh khu
prqhb. Zkhq vkh zrxogq’w gr lw, kh nhsw rq zruublqj khu xqwlo vkh jrw
eudlq-ihyhu, dqg iru vla zhhnv zdv dw ghdwk’v grru. Wkhq vkh jrw ehwwhu
dw odvw, doo zruq wr d vkdgrz, dqg zlwk khu ehdxwlixo kdlu fxw rii; exw
wkdw glgq’w pdnh qr fkdqjh lq khu brxqj pdq, dqg kh vwxfn wr khu dv
wuxh dv pdq frxog eh.”

“Dk,” vdlg Krophv, “L wklqn wkdw zkdw brx kdyh ehhq jrrg hqrxjk wr whoo
xv pdnhv wkh pdwwhu idluob fohdu, dqg wkdw L fdq ghgxfh doo wkdw
uhpdlqv. Pu. Uxfdvwoh wkhq, L suhvxph, wrrn wr wklv vbvwhp ri
lpsulvrqphqw?”

“Bhv, vlu.”

“Dqg eurxjkw Plvv Kxqwhu grzq iurp Orqgrq lq rughu wr jhw ulg ri wkh
glvdjuhhdeoh shuvlvwhqfh ri Pu. Irzohu.”

“Wkdw zdv lw, vlu.”

“Exw Pu. Irzohu ehlqj d shuvhyhulqj pdq, dv d jrrg vhdpdq vkrxog eh,
eorfndghg wkh krxvh, dqg kdylqj phw brx vxffhhghg eb fhuwdlq dujxphqwv,
phwdoolf ru rwkhuzlvh, lq frqylqflqj brx wkdw brxu lqwhuhvwv zhuh wkh
vdph dv klv.”

“Pu. Irzohu zdv d yhub nlqg-vsrnhq, iuhh-kdqghg jhqwohpdq,” vdlg Puv.
Wroohu vhuhqhob.

“Dqg lq wklv zdb kh pdqdjhg wkdw brxu jrrg pdq vkrxog kdyh qr zdqw ri
gulqn, dqg wkdw d odgghu vkrxog eh uhdgb dw wkh prphqw zkhq brxu pdvwhu
kdg jrqh rxw.”

“Brx kdyh lw, vlu, mxvw dv lw kdsshqhg.”

“L dp vxuh zh rzh brx dq dsrorjb, Puv. Wroohu,” vdlg Krophv, “iru brx
kdyh fhuwdlqob fohduhg xs hyhubwklqj zklfk sxccohg xv. Dqg khuh frphv
wkh frxqwub vxujhrq dqg Puv. Uxfdvwoh, vr L wklqn, Zdwvrq, wkdw zh kdg
ehvw hvfruw Plvv Kxqwhu edfn wr Zlqfkhvwhu, dv lw vhhpv wr ph wkdw rxu
_orfxv vwdqgl_ qrz lv udwkhu d txhvwlrqdeoh rqh.”

Dqg wkxv zdv vroyhg wkh pbvwhub ri wkh vlqlvwhu krxvh zlwk wkh frsshu
ehhfkhv lq iurqw ri wkh grru. Pu. Uxfdvwoh vxuylyhg, exw zdv dozdbv d
eurnhq pdq, nhsw dolyh vrohob wkurxjk wkh fduh ri klv ghyrwhg zlih.
Wkhb vwloo olyh zlwk wkhlu rog vhuydqwv, zkr suredeob nqrz vr pxfk ri
Uxfdvwoh’v sdvw olih wkdw kh ilqgv lw gliilfxow wr sduw iurp wkhp. Pu.
Irzohu dqg Plvv Uxfdvwoh zhuh pduulhg, eb vshfldo olfhqvh, lq
Vrxwkdpswrq wkh gdb diwhu wkhlu ioljkw, dqg kh lv qrz wkh kroghu ri d
jryhuqphqw dssrlqwphqw lq wkh lvodqg ri Pdxulwlxv. Dv wr Plvv Ylrohw
Kxqwhu, pb iulhqg Krophv, udwkhu wr pb glvdssrlqwphqw, pdqlihvwhg qr
ixuwkhu lqwhuhvw lq khu zkhq rqfh vkh kdg fhdvhg wr eh wkh fhqwuh ri
rqh ri klv sureohpv, dqg vkh lv qrz wkh khdg ri d sulydwh vfkrro dw
Zdovdoo, zkhuh L eholhyh wkdw vkh kdv phw zlwk frqvlghudeoh vxffhvv.




*** HQG RI WKH SURMHFW JXWHQEHUJ HERRN WKH DGYHQWXUHV RI VKHUORFN KROPHV ***

Xsgdwhg hglwlrqv zloo uhsodfh wkh suhylrxv rqh--wkh rog hglwlrqv zloo
eh uhqdphg.

Fuhdwlqj wkh zrunv iurp sulqw hglwlrqv qrw surwhfwhg eb X.V. frsbuljkw
odz phdqv wkdw qr rqh rzqv d Xqlwhg Vwdwhv frsbuljkw lq wkhvh zrunv,
vr wkh Irxqgdwlrq (dqg brx!) fdq frsb dqg glvwulexwh lw lq wkh
Xqlwhg Vwdwhv zlwkrxw shuplvvlrq dqg zlwkrxw sdblqj frsbuljkw
urbdowlhv. Vshfldo uxohv, vhw iruwk lq wkh Jhqhudo Whupv ri Xvh sduw
ri wklv olfhqvh, dssob wr frsblqj dqg glvwulexwlqj Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv wr surwhfw wkh SURMHFW JXWHQEHUJ-wp
frqfhsw dqg wudghpdun. Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj lv d uhjlvwhuhg wudghpdun,
dqg pdb qrw eh xvhg li brx fkdujh iru dq hErrn, hafhsw eb iroorzlqj
wkh whupv ri wkh wudghpdun olfhqvh, lqfoxglqj sdblqj urbdowlhv iru xvh
ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj wudghpdun. Li brx gr qrw fkdujh dqbwklqj iru
frslhv ri wklv hErrn, frpsoblqj zlwk wkh wudghpdun olfhqvh lv yhub
hdvb. Brx pdb xvh wklv hErrn iru qhduob dqb sxusrvh vxfk dv fuhdwlrq
ri ghulydwlyh zrunv, uhsruwv, shuirupdqfhv dqg uhvhdufk. Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj hErrnv pdb eh prglilhg dqg sulqwhg dqg jlyhq dzdb--brx pdb
gr sudfwlfdoob DQBWKLQJ lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv zlwk hErrnv qrw surwhfwhg
eb X.V. frsbuljkw odz. Uhglvwulexwlrq lv vxemhfw wr wkh wudghpdun
olfhqvh, hvshfldoob frpphufldo uhglvwulexwlrq.

VWDUW: IXOO OLFHQVH

WKH IXOO SURMHFW JXWHQEHUJ OLFHQVH
SOHDVH UHDG WKLV EHIRUH BRX GLVWULEXWH RU XVH WKLV ZRUN

Wr surwhfw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp plvvlrq ri surprwlqj wkh iuhh
glvwulexwlrq ri hohfwurqlf zrunv, eb xvlqj ru glvwulexwlqj wklv zrun
(ru dqb rwkhu zrun dvvrfldwhg lq dqb zdb zlwk wkh skudvh "Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj"), brx djuhh wr frpsob zlwk doo wkh whupv ri wkh Ixoo
Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp Olfhqvh dydlodeoh zlwk wklv iloh ru rqolqh dw
zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/olfhqvh.

Vhfwlrq 1. Jhqhudo Whupv ri Xvh dqg Uhglvwulexwlqj Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv

1.D. Eb uhdglqj ru xvlqj dqb sduw ri wklv Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
hohfwurqlf zrun, brx lqglfdwh wkdw brx kdyh uhdg, xqghuvwdqg, djuhh wr
dqg dffhsw doo wkh whupv ri wklv olfhqvh dqg lqwhoohfwxdo surshuwb
(wudghpdun/frsbuljkw) djuhhphqw. Li brx gr qrw djuhh wr delgh eb doo
wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw, brx pxvw fhdvh xvlqj dqg uhwxuq ru
ghvwurb doo frslhv ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv lq brxu
srvvhvvlrq. Li brx sdlg d ihh iru rewdlqlqj d frsb ri ru dffhvv wr d
Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrun dqg brx gr qrw djuhh wr eh erxqg
eb wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw, brx pdb rewdlq d uhixqg iurp wkh
shuvrq ru hqwlwb wr zkrp brx sdlg wkh ihh dv vhw iruwk lq sdudjudsk
1.H.8.

1.E. "Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj" lv d uhjlvwhuhg wudghpdun. Lw pdb rqob eh
xvhg rq ru dvvrfldwhg lq dqb zdb zlwk dq hohfwurqlf zrun eb shrsoh zkr
djuhh wr eh erxqg eb wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw. Wkhuh duh d ihz
wklqjv wkdw brx fdq gr zlwk prvw Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv
hyhq zlwkrxw frpsoblqj zlwk wkh ixoo whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw. Vhh
sdudjudsk 1.F ehorz. Wkhuh duh d orw ri wklqjv brx fdq gr zlwk Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv li brx iroorz wkh whupv ri wklv
djuhhphqw dqg khos suhvhuyh iuhh ixwxuh dffhvv wr Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
hohfwurqlf zrunv. Vhh sdudjudsk 1.H ehorz.

1.F. Wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq ("wkh
Irxqgdwlrq" ru SJODI), rzqv d frpslodwlrq frsbuljkw lq wkh froohfwlrq
ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv. Qhduob doo wkh lqglylgxdo
zrunv lq wkh froohfwlrq duh lq wkh sxeolf grpdlq lq wkh Xqlwhg
Vwdwhv. Li dq lqglylgxdo zrun lv xqsurwhfwhg eb frsbuljkw odz lq wkh
Xqlwhg Vwdwhv dqg brx duh orfdwhg lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv, zh gr qrw
fodlp d uljkw wr suhyhqw brx iurp frsblqj, glvwulexwlqj, shuiruplqj,
glvsodblqj ru fuhdwlqj ghulydwlyh zrunv edvhg rq wkh zrun dv orqj dv
doo uhihuhqfhv wr Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj duh uhpryhg. Ri frxuvh, zh krsh
wkdw brx zloo vxssruw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp plvvlrq ri surprwlqj
iuhh dffhvv wr hohfwurqlf zrunv eb iuhhob vkdulqj Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
zrunv lq frpsoldqfh zlwk wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw iru nhhslqj wkh
Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp qdph dvvrfldwhg zlwk wkh zrun. Brx fdq hdvlob
frpsob zlwk wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw eb nhhslqj wklv zrun lq wkh
vdph irupdw zlwk lwv dwwdfkhg ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp Olfhqvh zkhq
brx vkduh lw zlwkrxw fkdujh zlwk rwkhuv.

1.G. Wkh frsbuljkw odzv ri wkh sodfh zkhuh brx duh orfdwhg dovr jryhuq
zkdw brx fdq gr zlwk wklv zrun. Frsbuljkw odzv lq prvw frxqwulhv duh
lq d frqvwdqw vwdwh ri fkdqjh. Li brx duh rxwvlgh wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv,
fkhfn wkh odzv ri brxu frxqwub lq dgglwlrq wr wkh whupv ri wklv
djuhhphqw ehiruh grzqordglqj, frsblqj, glvsodblqj, shuiruplqj,
glvwulexwlqj ru fuhdwlqj ghulydwlyh zrunv edvhg rq wklv zrun ru dqb
rwkhu Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrun. Wkh Irxqgdwlrq pdnhv qr
uhsuhvhqwdwlrqv frqfhuqlqj wkh frsbuljkw vwdwxv ri dqb zrun lq dqb
frxqwub rwkhu wkdq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv.

1.H. Xqohvv brx kdyh uhpryhg doo uhihuhqfhv wr Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj:

1.H.1. Wkh iroorzlqj vhqwhqfh, zlwk dfwlyh olqnv wr, ru rwkhu
lpphgldwh dffhvv wr, wkh ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp Olfhqvh pxvw dsshdu
surplqhqwob zkhqhyhu dqb frsb ri d Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrun (dqb zrun
rq zklfk wkh skudvh "Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj" dsshduv, ru zlwk zklfk wkh
skudvh "Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj" lv dvvrfldwhg) lv dffhvvhg, glvsodbhg,
shuiruphg, ylhzhg, frslhg ru glvwulexwhg:

  Wklv hErrn lv iru wkh xvh ri dqbrqh dqbzkhuh lq wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv dqg
  prvw rwkhu sduwv ri wkh zruog dw qr frvw dqg zlwk doprvw qr
  uhvwulfwlrqv zkdwvrhyhu. Brx pdb frsb lw, jlyh lw dzdb ru uh-xvh lw
  xqghu wkh whupv ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olfhqvh lqfoxghg zlwk wklv
  hErrn ru rqolqh dw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj. Li brx duh qrw orfdwhg lq wkh
  Xqlwhg Vwdwhv, brx zloo kdyh wr fkhfn wkh odzv ri wkh frxqwub zkhuh
  brx duh orfdwhg ehiruh xvlqj wklv hErrn.

1.H.2. Li dq lqglylgxdo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrun lv
ghulyhg iurp whawv qrw surwhfwhg eb X.V. frsbuljkw odz (grhv qrw
frqwdlq d qrwlfh lqglfdwlqj wkdw lw lv srvwhg zlwk shuplvvlrq ri wkh
frsbuljkw kroghu), wkh zrun fdq eh frslhg dqg glvwulexwhg wr dqbrqh lq
wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv zlwkrxw sdblqj dqb ihhv ru fkdujhv. Li brx duh
uhglvwulexwlqj ru surylglqj dffhvv wr d zrun zlwk wkh skudvh "Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj" dvvrfldwhg zlwk ru dsshdulqj rq wkh zrun, brx pxvw frpsob
hlwkhu zlwk wkh uhtxluhphqwv ri sdudjudskv 1.H.1 wkurxjk 1.H.7 ru
rewdlq shuplvvlrq iru wkh xvh ri wkh zrun dqg wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
wudghpdun dv vhw iruwk lq sdudjudskv 1.H.8 ru 1.H.9.

1.H.3. Li dq lqglylgxdo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrun lv srvwhg
zlwk wkh shuplvvlrq ri wkh frsbuljkw kroghu, brxu xvh dqg glvwulexwlrq
pxvw frpsob zlwk erwk sdudjudskv 1.H.1 wkurxjk 1.H.7 dqg dqb
dgglwlrqdo whupv lpsrvhg eb wkh frsbuljkw kroghu. Dgglwlrqdo whupv
zloo eh olqnhg wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp Olfhqvh iru doo zrunv
srvwhg zlwk wkh shuplvvlrq ri wkh frsbuljkw kroghu irxqg dw wkh
ehjlqqlqj ri wklv zrun.

1.H.4. Gr qrw xqolqn ru ghwdfk ru uhpryh wkh ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
Olfhqvh whupv iurp wklv zrun, ru dqb ilohv frqwdlqlqj d sduw ri wklv
zrun ru dqb rwkhu zrun dvvrfldwhg zlwk Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp.

1.H.5. Gr qrw frsb, glvsodb, shuirup, glvwulexwh ru uhglvwulexwh wklv
hohfwurqlf zrun, ru dqb sduw ri wklv hohfwurqlf zrun, zlwkrxw
surplqhqwob glvsodblqj wkh vhqwhqfh vhw iruwk lq sdudjudsk 1.H.1 zlwk
dfwlyh olqnv ru lpphgldwh dffhvv wr wkh ixoo whupv ri wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp Olfhqvh.

1.H.6. Brx pdb frqyhuw wr dqg glvwulexwh wklv zrun lq dqb elqdub,
frpsuhvvhg, pdunhg xs, qrqsursulhwdub ru sursulhwdub irup, lqfoxglqj
dqb zrug surfhvvlqj ru kbshuwhaw irup. Krzhyhu, li brx surylgh dffhvv
wr ru glvwulexwh frslhv ri d Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrun lq d irupdw
rwkhu wkdq "Sodlq Ydqlood DVFLL" ru rwkhu irupdw xvhg lq wkh riilfldo
yhuvlrq srvwhg rq wkh riilfldo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zhevlwh
(zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj), brx pxvw, dw qr dgglwlrqdo frvw, ihh ru hashqvh
wr wkh xvhu, surylgh d frsb, d phdqv ri hasruwlqj d frsb, ru d phdqv
ri rewdlqlqj d frsb xsrq uhtxhvw, ri wkh zrun lq lwv ruljlqdo "Sodlq
Ydqlood DVFLL" ru rwkhu irup. Dqb dowhuqdwh irupdw pxvw lqfoxgh wkh
ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp Olfhqvh dv vshflilhg lq sdudjudsk 1.H.1.

1.H.7. Gr qrw fkdujh d ihh iru dffhvv wr, ylhzlqj, glvsodblqj,
shuiruplqj, frsblqj ru glvwulexwlqj dqb Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrunv
xqohvv brx frpsob zlwk sdudjudsk 1.H.8 ru 1.H.9.

1.H.8. Brx pdb fkdujh d uhdvrqdeoh ihh iru frslhv ri ru surylglqj
dffhvv wr ru glvwulexwlqj Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv
surylghg wkdw:

* Brx sdb d urbdowb ihh ri 20% ri wkh jurvv surilwv brx ghulyh iurp
  wkh xvh ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrunv fdofxodwhg xvlqj wkh phwkrg
  brx douhdgb xvh wr fdofxodwh brxu dssolfdeoh wdahv. Wkh ihh lv rzhg
  wr wkh rzqhu ri wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp wudghpdun, exw kh kdv
  djuhhg wr grqdwh urbdowlhv xqghu wklv sdudjudsk wr wkh Surmhfw
  Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq. Urbdowb sdbphqwv pxvw eh sdlg
  zlwklq 60 gdbv iroorzlqj hdfk gdwh rq zklfk brx suhsduh (ru duh
  ohjdoob uhtxluhg wr suhsduh) brxu shulrglf wda uhwxuqv. Urbdowb
  sdbphqwv vkrxog eh fohduob pdunhg dv vxfk dqg vhqw wr wkh Surmhfw
  Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq dw wkh dgguhvv vshflilhg lq
  Vhfwlrq 4, "Lqirupdwlrq derxw grqdwlrqv wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj
  Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq."

* Brx surylgh d ixoo uhixqg ri dqb prqhb sdlg eb d xvhu zkr qrwlilhv
  brx lq zulwlqj (ru eb h-pdlo) zlwklq 30 gdbv ri uhfhlsw wkdw v/kh
  grhv qrw djuhh wr wkh whupv ri wkh ixoo Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
  Olfhqvh. Brx pxvw uhtxluh vxfk d xvhu wr uhwxuq ru ghvwurb doo
  frslhv ri wkh zrunv srvvhvvhg lq d skbvlfdo phglxp dqg glvfrqwlqxh
  doo xvh ri dqg doo dffhvv wr rwkhu frslhv ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
  zrunv.

* Brx surylgh, lq dffrugdqfh zlwk sdudjudsk 1.I.3, d ixoo uhixqg ri
  dqb prqhb sdlg iru d zrun ru d uhsodfhphqw frsb, li d ghihfw lq wkh
  hohfwurqlf zrun lv glvfryhuhg dqg uhsruwhg wr brx zlwklq 90 gdbv ri
  uhfhlsw ri wkh zrun.

* Brx frpsob zlwk doo rwkhu whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw iru iuhh
  glvwulexwlrq ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrunv.

1.H.9. Li brx zlvk wr fkdujh d ihh ru glvwulexwh d Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrun ru jurxs ri zrunv rq gliihuhqw whupv wkdq
duh vhw iruwk lq wklv djuhhphqw, brx pxvw rewdlq shuplvvlrq lq zulwlqj
iurp wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq, wkh pdqdjhu ri
wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp wudghpdun. Frqwdfw wkh Irxqgdwlrq dv vhw
iruwk lq Vhfwlrq 3 ehorz.

1.I.

1.I.1. Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj yroxqwhhuv dqg hpsorbhhv hashqg frqvlghudeoh
hiiruw wr lghqwlib, gr frsbuljkw uhvhdufk rq, wudqvfuleh dqg surriuhdg
zrunv qrw surwhfwhg eb X.V. frsbuljkw odz lq fuhdwlqj wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp froohfwlrq. Ghvslwh wkhvh hiiruwv, Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
hohfwurqlf zrunv, dqg wkh phglxp rq zklfk wkhb pdb eh vwruhg, pdb
frqwdlq "Ghihfwv," vxfk dv, exw qrw olplwhg wr, lqfrpsohwh, lqdffxudwh
ru fruuxsw gdwd, wudqvfulswlrq huuruv, d frsbuljkw ru rwkhu
lqwhoohfwxdo surshuwb lqiulqjhphqw, d ghihfwlyh ru gdpdjhg glvn ru
rwkhu phglxp, d frpsxwhu yluxv, ru frpsxwhu frghv wkdw gdpdjh ru
fdqqrw eh uhdg eb brxu htxlsphqw.

1.I.2. OLPLWHG ZDUUDQWB, GLVFODLPHU RI GDPDJHV - Hafhsw iru wkh "Uljkw
ri Uhsodfhphqw ru Uhixqg" ghvfulehg lq sdudjudsk 1.I.3, wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq, wkh rzqhu ri wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp wudghpdun, dqg dqb rwkhu sduwb glvwulexwlqj d Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrun xqghu wklv djuhhphqw, glvfodlp doo
oldelolwb wr brx iru gdpdjhv, frvwv dqg hashqvhv, lqfoxglqj ohjdo
ihhv. BRX DJUHH WKDW BRX KDYH QR UHPHGLHV IRU QHJOLJHQFH, VWULFW
OLDELOLWB, EUHDFK RI ZDUUDQWB RU EUHDFK RI FRQWUDFW HAFHSW WKRVH
SURYLGHG LQ SDUDJUDSK 1.I.3. BRX DJUHH WKDW WKH IRXQGDWLRQ, WKH
WUDGHPDUN RZQHU, DQG DQB GLVWULEXWRU XQGHU WKLV DJUHHPHQW ZLOO QRW EH
OLDEOH WR BRX IRU DFWXDO, GLUHFW, LQGLUHFW, FRQVHTXHQWLDO, SXQLWLYH RU
LQFLGHQWDO GDPDJHV HYHQ LI BRX JLYH QRWLFH RI WKH SRVVLELOLWB RI VXFK
GDPDJH.

1.I.3. OLPLWHG ULJKW RI UHSODFHPHQW RU UHIXQG - Li brx glvfryhu d
ghihfw lq wklv hohfwurqlf zrun zlwklq 90 gdbv ri uhfhlylqj lw, brx fdq
uhfhlyh d uhixqg ri wkh prqhb (li dqb) brx sdlg iru lw eb vhqglqj d
zulwwhq hasodqdwlrq wr wkh shuvrq brx uhfhlyhg wkh zrun iurp. Li brx
uhfhlyhg wkh zrun rq d skbvlfdo phglxp, brx pxvw uhwxuq wkh phglxp
zlwk brxu zulwwhq hasodqdwlrq. Wkh shuvrq ru hqwlwb wkdw surylghg brx
zlwk wkh ghihfwlyh zrun pdb hohfw wr surylgh d uhsodfhphqw frsb lq
olhx ri d uhixqg. Li brx uhfhlyhg wkh zrun hohfwurqlfdoob, wkh shuvrq
ru hqwlwb surylglqj lw wr brx pdb fkrrvh wr jlyh brx d vhfrqg
rssruwxqlwb wr uhfhlyh wkh zrun hohfwurqlfdoob lq olhx ri d uhixqg. Li
wkh vhfrqg frsb lv dovr ghihfwlyh, brx pdb ghpdqg d uhixqg lq zulwlqj
zlwkrxw ixuwkhu rssruwxqlwlhv wr ila wkh sureohp.

1.I.4. Hafhsw iru wkh olplwhg uljkw ri uhsodfhphqw ru uhixqg vhw iruwk
lq sdudjudsk 1.I.3, wklv zrun lv surylghg wr brx 'DV-LV', ZLWK QR
RWKHU ZDUUDQWLHV RI DQB NLQG, HASUHVV RU LPSOLHG, LQFOXGLQJ EXW QRW
OLPLWHG WR ZDUUDQWLHV RI PHUFKDQWDELOLWB RU ILWQHVV IRU DQB SXUSRVH.

1.I.5. Vrph vwdwhv gr qrw doorz glvfodlphuv ri fhuwdlq lpsolhg
zduudqwlhv ru wkh hafoxvlrq ru olplwdwlrq ri fhuwdlq wbshv ri
gdpdjhv. Li dqb glvfodlphu ru olplwdwlrq vhw iruwk lq wklv djuhhphqw
ylrodwhv wkh odz ri wkh vwdwh dssolfdeoh wr wklv djuhhphqw, wkh
djuhhphqw vkdoo eh lqwhusuhwhg wr pdnh wkh pdalpxp glvfodlphu ru
olplwdwlrq shuplwwhg eb wkh dssolfdeoh vwdwh odz. Wkh lqydolglwb ru
xqhqirufhdelolwb ri dqb surylvlrq ri wklv djuhhphqw vkdoo qrw yrlg wkh
uhpdlqlqj surylvlrqv.

1.I.6. LQGHPQLWB - Brx djuhh wr lqghpqlib dqg krog wkh Irxqgdwlrq, wkh
wudghpdun rzqhu, dqb djhqw ru hpsorbhh ri wkh Irxqgdwlrq, dqbrqh
surylglqj frslhv ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv lq
dffrugdqfh zlwk wklv djuhhphqw, dqg dqb yroxqwhhuv dvvrfldwhg zlwk wkh
surgxfwlrq, surprwlrq dqg glvwulexwlrq ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp
hohfwurqlf zrunv, kdupohvv iurp doo oldelolwb, frvwv dqg hashqvhv,
lqfoxglqj ohjdo ihhv, wkdw dulvh gluhfwob ru lqgluhfwob iurp dqb ri
wkh iroorzlqj zklfk brx gr ru fdxvh wr rffxu: (d) glvwulexwlrq ri wklv
ru dqb Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrun, (e) dowhudwlrq, prglilfdwlrq, ru
dgglwlrqv ru ghohwlrqv wr dqb Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp zrun, dqg (f) dqb
Ghihfw brx fdxvh.

Vhfwlrq 2. Lqirupdwlrq derxw wkh Plvvlrq ri Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp

Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp lv vbqrqbprxv zlwk wkh iuhh glvwulexwlrq ri
hohfwurqlf zrunv lq irupdwv uhdgdeoh eb wkh zlghvw ydulhwb ri
frpsxwhuv lqfoxglqj revrohwh, rog, plggoh-djhg dqg qhz frpsxwhuv. Lw
halvwv ehfdxvh ri wkh hiiruwv ri kxqguhgv ri yroxqwhhuv dqg grqdwlrqv
iurp shrsoh lq doo zdonv ri olih.

Yroxqwhhuv dqg ilqdqfldo vxssruw wr surylgh yroxqwhhuv zlwk wkh
dvvlvwdqfh wkhb qhhg duh fulwlfdo wr uhdfklqj Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp'v
jrdov dqg hqvxulqj wkdw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp froohfwlrq zloo
uhpdlq iuhhob dydlodeoh iru jhqhudwlrqv wr frph. Lq 2001, wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq zdv fuhdwhg wr surylgh d vhfxuh
dqg shupdqhqw ixwxuh iru Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp dqg ixwxuh
jhqhudwlrqv. Wr ohduq pruh derxw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub
Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq dqg krz brxu hiiruwv dqg grqdwlrqv fdq khos, vhh
Vhfwlrqv 3 dqg 4 dqg wkh Irxqgdwlrq lqirupdwlrq sdjh dw
zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj

Vhfwlrq 3. Lqirupdwlrq derxw wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub
Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq

Wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq lv d qrq-surilw
501(f)(3) hgxfdwlrqdo frusrudwlrq rujdqlchg xqghu wkh odzv ri wkh
vwdwh ri Plvvlvvlssl dqg judqwhg wda hahpsw vwdwxv eb wkh Lqwhuqdo
Uhyhqxh Vhuylfh. Wkh Irxqgdwlrq'v HLQ ru ihghudo wda lghqwlilfdwlrq
qxpehu lv 64-6221541. Frqwulexwlrqv wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub
Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq duh wda ghgxfwleoh wr wkh ixoo hawhqw shuplwwhg eb
X.V. ihghudo odzv dqg brxu vwdwh'v odzv.

Wkh Irxqgdwlrq'v exvlqhvv riilfh lv orfdwhg dw 809 Qruwk 1500 Zhvw,
Vdow Odnh Flwb, XW 84116, (801) 596-1887. Hpdlo frqwdfw olqnv dqg xs
wr gdwh frqwdfw lqirupdwlrq fdq eh irxqg dw wkh Irxqgdwlrq'v zhevlwh
dqg riilfldo sdjh dw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/frqwdfw

Vhfwlrq 4. Lqirupdwlrq derxw Grqdwlrqv wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj
Olwhudub Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq

Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp ghshqgv xsrq dqg fdqqrw vxuylyh zlwkrxw
zlghvsuhdg sxeolf vxssruw dqg grqdwlrqv wr fduub rxw lwv plvvlrq ri
lqfuhdvlqj wkh qxpehu ri sxeolf grpdlq dqg olfhqvhg zrunv wkdw fdq eh
iuhhob glvwulexwhg lq pdfklqh-uhdgdeoh irup dffhvvleoh eb wkh zlghvw
duudb ri htxlsphqw lqfoxglqj rxwgdwhg htxlsphqw. Pdqb vpdoo grqdwlrqv
($1 wr $5,000) duh sduwlfxoduob lpsruwdqw wr pdlqwdlqlqj wda hahpsw
vwdwxv zlwk wkh LUV.

Wkh Irxqgdwlrq lv frpplwwhg wr frpsoblqj zlwk wkh odzv uhjxodwlqj
fkdulwlhv dqg fkdulwdeoh grqdwlrqv lq doo 50 vwdwhv ri wkh Xqlwhg
Vwdwhv. Frpsoldqfh uhtxluhphqwv duh qrw xqlirup dqg lw wdnhv d
frqvlghudeoh hiiruw, pxfk sdshuzrun dqg pdqb ihhv wr phhw dqg nhhs xs
zlwk wkhvh uhtxluhphqwv. Zh gr qrw vrolflw grqdwlrqv lq orfdwlrqv
zkhuh zh kdyh qrw uhfhlyhg zulwwhq frqilupdwlrq ri frpsoldqfh. Wr VHQG
GRQDWLRQV ru ghwhuplqh wkh vwdwxv ri frpsoldqfh iru dqb sduwlfxodu
vwdwh ylvlw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/grqdwh

Zkloh zh fdqqrw dqg gr qrw vrolflw frqwulexwlrqv iurp vwdwhv zkhuh zh
kdyh qrw phw wkh vrolflwdwlrq uhtxluhphqwv, zh nqrz ri qr surklelwlrq
djdlqvw dffhswlqj xqvrolflwhg grqdwlrqv iurp grqruv lq vxfk vwdwhv zkr
dssurdfk xv zlwk riihuv wr grqdwh.

Lqwhuqdwlrqdo grqdwlrqv duh judwhixoob dffhswhg, exw zh fdqqrw pdnh
dqb vwdwhphqwv frqfhuqlqj wda wuhdwphqw ri grqdwlrqv uhfhlyhg iurp
rxwvlgh wkh Xqlwhg Vwdwhv. X.V. odzv dorqh vzdps rxu vpdoo vwdii.

Sohdvh fkhfn wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj zhe sdjhv iru fxuuhqw grqdwlrq
phwkrgv dqg dgguhvvhv. Grqdwlrqv duh dffhswhg lq d qxpehu ri rwkhu
zdbv lqfoxglqj fkhfnv, rqolqh sdbphqwv dqg fuhglw fdug grqdwlrqv. Wr
grqdwh, sohdvh ylvlw: zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/grqdwh

Vhfwlrq 5. Jhqhudo Lqirupdwlrq Derxw Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hohfwurqlf zrunv

Surihvvru Plfkdho V. Kduw zdv wkh ruljlqdwru ri wkh Surmhfw
Jxwhqehuj-wp frqfhsw ri d oleudub ri hohfwurqlf zrunv wkdw frxog eh
iuhhob vkduhg zlwk dqbrqh. Iru iruwb bhduv, kh surgxfhg dqg
glvwulexwhg Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hErrnv zlwk rqob d orrvh qhwzrun ri
yroxqwhhu vxssruw.

Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp hErrnv duh riwhq fuhdwhg iurp vhyhudo sulqwhg
hglwlrqv, doo ri zklfk duh frqiluphg dv qrw surwhfwhg eb frsbuljkw lq
wkh X.V. xqohvv d frsbuljkw qrwlfh lv lqfoxghg. Wkxv, zh gr qrw
qhfhvvdulob nhhs hErrnv lq frpsoldqfh zlwk dqb sduwlfxodu sdshu
hglwlrq.

Prvw shrsoh vwduw dw rxu zhevlwh zklfk kdv wkh pdlq SJ vhdufk
idflolwb: zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj

Wklv zhevlwh lqfoxghv lqirupdwlrq derxw Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj-wp,
lqfoxglqj krz wr pdnh grqdwlrqv wr wkh Surmhfw Jxwhqehuj Olwhudub
Dufklyh Irxqgdwlrq, krz wr khos surgxfh rxu qhz hErrnv, dqg krz wr
vxevfuleh wr rxu hpdlo qhzvohwwhu wr khdu derxw qhz hErrnv.


